---
layout: post
title: Sexy Interviewing
date: 2013-10-24 02:04
comments: true
tags: effectiveness, jobs
---

Yesterday, a friend of mine asked for my response to a question for a report she
was writing about the interviewing process. My answer came out better than I
expected, and with the perfect storm of needing to blog AND having just finished
all of my interviews for the term, it seemed like a good thing to share.

The following is my interviewing strategy. It has *literally* (in the original
sense, not this newfangled sense of "figuratively") never failed me in over
twenty-five interviews over the last three years. I'm not claiming it's a
magical recipe for success, but those numbers certainly suggest that there's
something to it.

---

> "What are effective ways to promote and differentiate yourself in an interview
> so that you leave a meaningful, lasting impression?"

Personally, I don't care much about being remembered as a stand out candidate --
my concerns deal solely with being offered a job. The distinction here is
subtle, but important. To this extent, there are only two facets of yourself
that need to be illustrated to any potential interviewers: being capable and
being charismatic. What's even better is that the first is *completely
optional*: if you're already at an interview, as far as the employer is
concerned, you're already capable enough (as long as you haven't lied on your
resume).

Being charismatic is the real secret behind getting hired. The interview process
is not an opportunity to show an employer that they should hire you, rather that
they *want to work with you*. Turn the charm dial all the way up to 11, and come
into the interview smiling, confident that the employer can't afford to not hire
you. Establish rapport; introduce yourself; ask how their day is going, and if
there have been any promising candidates so far -- regardless of the answer,
here is an opportunity to make the interviewer laugh -- take it. Look people in
the eyes whenever you are speaking to them, and use their name to prove that you
know it.

In general, behave exactly how you'd like to behave in the job. If this is
unacceptable to the employer, it's okay if you don't get the job, because you
wouldn't have been happy anyway.

During the interview proper, maintain that friendly, jovial smile. Don't fake
it, because people will be able to see right through your facade, but not faking
should be easy since you're genuinely excited to work here (otherwise why would
you have applied?). Answer one or two questions with a joke to get a quick laugh
before you answer it seriously. Whenever the opportunity arises, mention an
interest or hobby of yours -- you might be surprised at how many formal
interviews can derail into an hour long discussion of the merits of the banjo.
If you can pull it off, this is always a good thing, but make sure you are
wholeheartedly remorseful that you never got to the meatier parts of the
interview.

At the end of the interview, you will be given an opportunity to ask any
questions of your own. Ask about the interviewer and about what the team is
like. Ask what you will be working on, and what characteristic traits a highly
successful candidate would possess. Don't be afraid to ask any zingers on your
mind. As a matter of fact, you should probably have some "stock" hard questions
in your tool belt. I'm very partial to "if you had to change something about
corporation X, what would it be?" When your time is up, thank the interviewer
for their time and shake their hand. Reiterate your interest in working *with*
them, and wish them luck with the rest of their interviews.

---

The overarching theme is demonstrating that you have strong principles which you
are unwilling to compromise. You are your own person, and you will not change
that just to impress someone you've never met before, regardless of who they
are. It might sound counterintuitive, but sticking to your morals will impress
anyone worth working for far more than putting on your best suit and pretending
that you are all business.

They say that confidence is sexy. Be sexy. Get that dream job. It's hard to
argue against being sexy and having a dream job.

