---
layout: post
title: Systematic Undertaking
date: 2013-07-23 02:02
comments: true
tags: effectiveness, time
---

> Part 3 of a 3 part series on time management.

Do you know that sensation of having a food craving? Probably - I'm sure you can
remember a time when you would have killed to get your hands on a juicy steak, a
piece of chocolate, or a plate of french fries. Food cravings, while having
nothing to do with time management, do offer a valuable insight into the reasons
we do things. When you start salivating over the idea of a big slab of red meat,
it's not because you or your body wants red meat in and of itself - more
probably you are experiencing a temporary iron deficiency and that craving is
your body's means of rectifying the situation. This concept of wanting things by
proxy is a powerful idea when we take the analytical view of our lives.

I'm sure the metaphor is clear - when you experience the need to watch
television, peruse reddit, or put off that important homework for another day,
it's likely that you aren't doing these activities for their own sake. What
instead you are doing is attempting to cultivate some lower-level desire which
is manifest in your want to procrastinate. When you want to watch TV, more
likely you are experiencing a need for novelty, relaxation, and entertainment.
It's not the television that's important to you; it's what you get out of it.

While wanting things by proxy is an easy evolutionary hack, it's not an optimal
way to go about things. Instead of desiring red meat, it would be more effective
to want iron suppliments. Instead of wanting to watch TV, it would be better to
desire activities which provide more novelty, relaxation and entertainment per
unit time.

If you've read the [other] [value of information] [articles] [polyphasing] in
this series, you probably know where I'm going from here. If we can correctly
analyze the reasons that we do things, we can come up with more efficient ways
of accomplishing the same things, which leads to both more time and being more
satisfied with our lives.

Just to clarify, the techniques introduced in this post are effective
*everywhere in life*, not simply for things you procrastinate.

**Fair warning:** this process in entirety will probably take about five hours
before you notice any significant changes on your life. If that seems like too
long a time to spend to you, you might want to consider performing a [value of
information] calculation on it. This is left as an exercise to the reader, but I
guarantee you that it will be worth it.

[value of information]: /blog/time-compression
[polyphasing]: /blog/polyphasing


## Building the Infrastructure

Before getting to the technique itself, we need to come up with some fodder for
the cannon. Dedicate five or ten minutes to constructing a list of things which
take you more than one hour a week. Make sure you are as specific as possible;
instead of "wasting time on the internet", write "ambling about on facebook",
"watching youtube videos", and any other things that you spend time online
doing. Ensure that the things you write down are actions that you *actually do*.

Write up your list before continuing to the next paragraph.

Now that you have a list of things that you spend lots of time doing, pick one
that seems the most egregious to you. For our purposes, the more complicated the
activity, the better. Unfortunately, the first five to ten activities that we
factor into constituent parts are going to be the hardest, since we'll be
performing a [depth-first search] [dfs] through our minds. What this means is
that the first activities will be setting the groundwork for the rest of the
activities - ie. the infrastructure.

The next step is to set up a [workflowy] document. This is a fantastic service
that allows you to create arbitrarily deep lists and sublists - something
exceptionally useful for dumping out the contents of your brain which likely has
some sort of hierarchical structure. You'll need to sign up for an account, and
if you use the referal link above workflowy will give you and me more space on
the website. It's a win/win scenario!

At the top of your workflowy document, create an item titled "Systematic
Undertaking", and as a child item of that create one with the name of the
activity you have chosen. As a bullet point of *that*, list any subgoals that
you achieve by doing this activity. Attempt to make all of your subgoals nouns,
as this will simplify the process later on.

Once you have these subgoals listed, attempt to break each of them into
sub-subgoals. Rinse and repeat. From here it's turtles all the way down until
you reach terminal goals, which we will discuss in a second. In the mean time,
as an example, here is (an excerpt of) what the first three tiers of one of my
activities looks like:

- Going on Facebook
    - Building friendships
        - Creating social opportunities
            - Doing things
            - Meeting new people
        - Having friends
            - **Companionship**
            - Having people to do things with
    - Getting school class information
        - Getting important reminders about school
            - Not missing important dates
            - Not needing to worry about important reminders myself
        - Having a support group to ask about homework
            - Doing well in school
        - Staying in the loop
            - Ensure I am not missing opportunities
    - Mental relaxation
        - **Having mental energy**
            - Being able to focus
            - Being able to do things
            - Being coherent
    - Showing off my wit
        - Feeling smart
            - Ego
        - Impressing people
            - Feeling powerful
            - Increase people's perception of me
            - Make people think about me
        - Making people laugh
            - **Social acceptance**
            - Making people think about me

My actual workflowy node for "Going on Facebook" is actually closer to 15 levels
deep and at least ten times as large as this excerpt might indicate. The nodes I
have bolded are what I call "terminal goals", things that I desire for
themselves. Sometimes terminal goals might have subgoals, but sometimes they
won't. You know you're finished analyzing your activities when all of your
sublists bottom out into unfactorable terminal goals.

If you find the same goal popping up in multiple places, don't worry about it!
Simply factor it out in one location, and don't in the other places. There's no
sense in duplicating our work for no reason.

You might notice that the deeper into this tree you get, the more abstract the
concepts become. Don't be alarmed if they get really meta (things like "love",
"being happy", "survival") - even though it seems strange to wonder why these
are things you want, there is value to it. Don't get discouraged by how weird
this can become.

As a heads-up, in the process of doing this you will probably learn some things
about you that you *do not like*. It's understandable that this can dissuade you
from continuing the process ([humans tend to avoid things that they find
unpleasant][pavlovian conditioning]), but try to remember the [litany of
Gendlin]. If you are learning these things about yourself, it's because they're
already true about you. Once you know things about yourself that you don't like,
you have the option to *do something about it*.

By now, you should have one activity fully mapped out, all the way down to
terminal goals. Now it's time to pick a new activity, and factor that too.
You'll notice that this one will go faster. Not only will  you be better at
breaking activities into subgoals, but also you'll notice that a lot of the
legwork has already been done. Naturally there will be a lot of carry-over
between the more abstract goals. After five or ten activities, you'll notice
that factoring a new one will take no more than three minutes. This is the power
of developing an infrastructure.

After you're finished factoring the rest of the activites on your list, it's
time to reap the rewards of our hard work.

[dfs]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search
[workflowy]: https://workflowy.com/?ref=fdcd91c
[pavlovian conditioning]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_conditioning
[litany of Gendlin]: http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Litany_of_Gendlin


## Systematic Undertaking

It's time to reframe the way we look at our workflowy document. Instead of being
a document of the reasons why we do certain things, it's now a document of the
things we *actually, really* care about. This is a big, fundamental shift, so
take a moment to appreciate it.

Since we now know why we do the things we do, we can start to look for better
ways of accomplishing the same things, and ways of better allocating our mental
resources. While Facebook might be the best way for me to stay in touch with
people, it's certainly not the best way for me to relax. Take ten minutes to
look over your list and identify which activities are effective at accomplishing
the things you're using them to accomplish, and which aren't. Brainstorm to find
activities which are good at attaining several goals simultaneously.

Stop doing the activities that aren't very effective, start doing new ones which
are. Having more efficient goal-oriented activities means you will be left with
more spare time while staying true to all of the things that you care about.
This will likely also give you more of a sense of satisfaction about life, and
if that isn't the greatest thing in the world, I don't know what is.

This process of **Systematic Undertaking** is also good at avoiding cost sinks
before experiencing them. Performing the goal factoring technique before
starting a new activity can help you notice when something isn't worth starting.
Personally, I try to vet absolutely everything I do through this process. I'm
regularly surprised at how often it tells me that something I feel like I want
to do isn't actually something I want to do. It's certainly a strange
experience, but my agenda book certainly appreciates it.


## Acknowledgements

Systematic Undertaking is heavily based on [Leverage Research]'s powerful
connection theory, which the [Center for Applied Rationality][CFAR] calls "Goal
Factoring". Systematic Undertaking is a little more applied and (I think) more
applicable to every day life. Significant differences from Goal Factoring
include using workflowy as the medium, and the explicit infrastructure-building
step.

Personally, it is my impression that Goal Factoring is unfortunately named as it
implies a certain abstractness that isn't as present as the name would imply.
With that being said, this technique would *not exist* had I not been exposed to
Leverage Research or CFAR, so all of the credit really goes to them.

[Leverage Research]: http://www.leverageresearch.org/
[CFAR]: http://rationality.org/

