---
layout: post
title: Say Hi to Lucy
date: 2013-10-10 01:59
comments: true
tags: rebuttal,
---

Say hi to Lucy.

![Hi, Lucy](/images/lucy/lucy.png)

You might have already met Lucy in [an article that's recently gone
viral][geny]. It's an article that's been bothering me ever since I first read
it. Since then I've read and re-read it time and time again in an attempt to
assemble this blog post into a suitable refutation of the original article. It's
been hard.

[geny]: http://www.waitbutwhy.com/2013/09/why-generation-y-yuppies-are-unhappy.html

It's been extraordinarily hard, actually because I think Tim Urban's analysis is
rather spot-on. What I do disagree with, however, is the tone of the post-- "Why
Generation Y Yuppies Are Unhappy" doesn't offer us any advice on what to do if
the analysis is correct and we are, in fact, unhappy. The absence of it strikes
me an insidious mental stop-sign for the general population that there *is
nothing to be done*. Being unhappy is a reality that my generation needs to
face, and that's that.

I'm not okay with that. If there is something about your life that you don't
like, [do something about it][happy]. Complaining about it isn't going to do you
or anyone else any favors.

[happy]: /blog/the-secret-of-happinesstm

Anyway, back to Lucy.

Lucy's enjoying her GYPSY life, and she's very pleased to be Lucy. Only issue is
this one thing:

Lucy's kind of unhappy.

Well, that's not technically true. On a day-to-day basis she goes out with
friends, is engaged in interesting hobbies, and for the most part loves life.
Lucy's kind of unhappy when she thinks about the bigger picture, about why she
isn't a young, beautiful, self-made billionaire who is curing AIDS, demolishing
world hunger, who fights crime by night and still has time to throw lavish
parties for her celebrity friends.

At the very least, she's kind of unhappy about her career. Let's talk about
that.

To get to the bottom of why, we need to define what makes someone happy or
unhappy in the first place. It comes down to a simple formula:

![A Simple Formula](/images/lucy/math.gif)

Wait, no, sorry, that's my first-year calculus homework. It's actually
integration, something which has nothing to do with happiness, although it's
probably [closer to the truth][truth] than something as ridiculously naive as

[truth]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgRlrBl-7Yg

![The stupidest thing I've ever seen](/images/lucy/happiness.png)

All of her life, Lucy's been told to "follow her passion" and that if she "does
what she loves, the money will follow". These are sweet, fluffy, uplifting
messages, but as we've previously discovered, [conventional wisdom is often
wrong][learned]. In his book, [So Good They Can't Ignore You], [Cal Newport]
makes a pretty convincing argument about why.

[learned]: /blog/a-lesson-learned

In fact, his argument is so good that I was just going to point people there
instead of writing this post. My friends, however, erroneously seem to be more
interested in reading a snarky blog than his book. That's life for you.

Anyway, Newport's book can essentially be summed with the excerpt "working right
trumps finding the right work": it's not so important where you are, but instead
how you get there that counts. Like in most aspects of life, if your
meta-strategy is stable and well-behaved, things will get better if you give
them the chance. What's more inspiring is that the more well-behaved your
meta-strategy, the *faster* things will get better.

So the real question to look at now is what defines a well-behaved meta-strategy
for a fulfilling career (a **WeBeMeStratFulCar**, if you will)? Well, it turns
out that people following their passion are more of an exception than the rule.
As Newport explores in his book, most people in jobs they really like got there
by what an outside observer might describe as "sheer dumb luck". There is no
rhyme or reason to it, just people making small moves that seem like a good
direction to go in, while acquiring useful skills in the meantime.

One facet of a **WeBeMeStratFulCar** is to revoke the idea that passion in what
you do is necessary for career happiness. This is known as the passion mindset,
and it is a Bad Thing. A better mindset to adopt is the so-called craftsman's
mindset, which embodies the concepts of getting *really, really good* at a rare
and valuable skill. So good... you might say, that they can't ignore you?

We will discuss how the craftsman's mindset will significantly improve your
happiness next time, but for the time being, your homework is to come up with a
list of skills. Not of things you're good at, but of things you'd be *willing to
become* good at.

***

If JFK had been a post-nationalist he would have famously quipped "ask not what
your world can do for you. Ask what you can do for your world". If you're
unhappy where you are career-wise, try being a little more like JFK  ([but only
a little][jfk]).

[jfk]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yQU4bbPbr7w

[So Good They Can't Ignore You]: http://www.amazon.com/Good-They-Cant-Ignore-You/dp/1455509124
[Cal Newport]: http://calnewport.com/

