---
layout: post
title: Polyphasic Sleep
date: 2013-07-10 12:21
comments: true
tags: effectiveness, time, refuted
---

> **EDIT 2015-07-23:** I no longer endorse polyphasic sleep schedules, but I
think this is an interesting post, so I'm keeping it up.

> Part 2 of a 3 part series on time management.

In my last post, we discussed *using math to identify potential ways of saving
time*. Today I want to discuss a very specific way of saving time. In
particular, a very specific way of saving *a lot* of time. Like, 60 days *every
year* worth of saved time. If you had been doing this since you were born, it
would effectively boost your expected life span by 14 years.

I don't know about you, but I'm a big fan of having an extra two months every
year. That's a *huge* comparative advantage to the poor suckers who only get a
laughable 12.

If your interest is piqued ([as it should be][more]), you're probably wondering
what sorcery is this that allows us to pull two months out of our pants.

[more]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/2c/a_sense_that_more_is_possible/

## Polyphasic Sleep

> Warning: this is some weird stuff. Try not to dismiss it off the bat for that
> reason alone.

How many hours do you sleep a day? Okay, poor line of inquiry. How many hours
*should* you sleep a day? Generally, eight is what they say.

Everybody who sleeps eight hours a day: please put your hands up. Is your hand
up? I didn't think so. Eight hours is a significant chunk of the day, and if we
were to listen to the world's generally good advice, we'd lose a significant
chunk of our lives. I think, unconsciously, we all know this, and this is the
reason why sleep deprevation is so common.

So, there are two problems here which are opposing one another. Eight hours is
an unacceptable amount of time to spent asleep, but sleep deprivation is a bad
thing. This problem seems intractable - after all, how can we sleep less and yet
not deprive ourselves in the process?

The answer, as usual, is arrived at through the application of agency. Instead
of just giving up in the face of adversity, let's take a second to deconstruct
the problem into more managable chunks. A gentle reframing of our wants is of
use here - we don't *want* sleep, we *want* the benefits of sleep. So the
question we need to ask ourselves is, "why is sleep good?".

Seriously..

## Why is Sleep Good?

This is a relatively hard question, actually. Since sleep is literally
universal, we don't have a lot of data on sleep itself. What we do have,
however, is information about what happens due to sleep deprivation. This
distinction is subtle, but poignant.

A quick [wikipedia][sleepdep] [search][rem] seems to imply that
rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is important for every day functioning (REM
deprivation symptoms include irritability, drowsiness, concentration
difficulties, lack of creativity, and most of the things we commonly associate
with not having a good night's sleep), while non-REM (NREM) seems to be
essential for long-term healthiness and neuroplastic reconcilliation of memories
and physical motions both.

[sleepdep]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sleep_deprivation#Effects_on_the_brain
[rem]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/REM_sleep#Effects_of_REM_sleep_deprivation

OK, both REM and NREM sleep are important. Of the two, it seems like REM is
*more important* to the prevention of *short-term* sleep deprivation. Let's
start there. [This page][understand] mentions a few interesting facts, the first
of which is that sleep occurs in 90 minute cycles with the REM portion coming at
the very end, and that REM-deprivation will lead to skipping the first section
of the sleep cycle in an attempt to "catch up".

[understand]: http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/brain_basics/understanding_sleep.htm#dynamic_activity

Interesting. The alarm bells in your head should be ringing right now; this is
beginning to sound exploitable. If we can trick our bodies into thinking that
they're REM-deprived, we can skip the usual ramp-up time to get to REM sleep. If
NREM weren't important whatsoever, we'd already have a solution to our original
problem.

Unfortunately, NREM, in fact, *is* important if we want to be able to maintain
this solution of ours for any significant amount of time. It is clear that our
solution is still missing a critical piece, so we need to dig deeper. The most
obvious solution is to simply add a few regular (non REM-deprived) sleep cycles
to our routine - so we'll give that a try.

## A Little Math and a Big Plan

Let's do a little math to make sure we're on the right track here. In normal
(monophasic) sleep, at 8 hours of sleep a night and 90 minute sleep cycles:

$\frac{8 hours * 60 \frac{minutes}{hour}}{90 \frac{minutes}{cycle}} = 5 cycles$

and (according to the NIH), about 20% of that is REM:

$\frac{8 hours * 60 \frac{minutes}{hour}} * 20% REM = 96 minutes REM$,
alternatively $18 \frac{minutes REM}{cycle}$

The majority of our sleep is in NREM ($72 {minutes REM}{cycle}$) , so this seems
like a good place to start culling time. If we want to shave off $4 hours = 240
minutes$ of our night, that corresponds to $\frac{240 minutes}{72 \frac{minutes
NREM}{cycle}} = 3 cycles of NREM$.

Shaving off three sleep cycles means that we have 2 remaining - a sleep of just
3 hours. In the polyphasic vernacular, this sleep is known as a "core". However,
we're not done yet - we are still missing 3 cycles worth of REM sleep.

We know that if we sleep while REM-deprived we can launch immediately into REM
sleep, and we know that we get 18 minutes of REM sleep every cycle. This
suggests that if we want to only get REM sleep, we should take 18 minute naps,
and only do so while REM-deprived. Taking an 20 minute nap (let's round for
convenience) is easy, and it's likely that splitting our REM intake throughout
the day will help trick our body into thinking that we're REM-deprived.

And that's pretty much all there is to it. Figuring out when to nap is the last
piece of the puzzle, but the indicators (and especially the math) all say we're
probably going to be OK with this course of action.

The polyphasic sleep schedule we've developed in this post is known as everyman
three. We'll [defer to others][em3] for determining when the optimal times to
take our naps should be.

[em3]: http://www.polyphasicsociety.com/polyphasic-sleep/overviews/everyman/

## Conclusion

So there you have it. A relatively scientifically backed means of turning 24
hours into 28 hours. Just don't tell your math professor.

I've been mostly (although not exceptionally rigorously) following this schedule
for about seven months now, and I absolutely love it. Not only is it a great
conversation piece, but it means I get four extra hours of productivity (they're
necessarily productive because if they weren't you might as well just be
sleeping) every day. Whenever I slip up and phase back into regular-person
sleep, I feel terrible and groggy for a few days.

I consider this evidence that I am doing something right.

Anyway, if this post has inspired you to give polyphasic sleep a try, I'd
*absolutely love* to hear about it. Drop me a line at **sandy [DOT] g [DOT]
maguire [AT] gmail [DOT] com**. <del>Trust me, it's worth it.</del>

