---
layout: post
title: "Power Word: Case Study"
date: 2014-03-18 07:36
comments: true
tags: crazy, science
---

**Heads up! I'm talking about the *dark arts of the mind* in this post. Continue
at your own risk.**

## Power Word: Trust

A friend and I were recently discussing which magical spells we'd like to have.
In an attempt to avoid the boring answer of "flight" and "invisibility", we
added a constraint: your magical spells aren't allowed to violate any laws of
physics. It's a fun question, I'd recommend busting it out at your next festive
event-party. People have some interesting answers, and my friend at the time did
too, but I can't remember what she said because I was too excited about my own
idea.

Here's what I wanted for a magic spell: *Power Word: Trust*. If you're not
familiar with Power Words, they're a concept fro Dungeons and Dragons which are
words so powerful that their mere utterance can change the fabric of reality.
Personally, I wasn't allowed to change the fabric of reality, but I was allowed
to change people's minds. *Power Word: Trust* would be a word that I could use
to make someone trust my line of argument. My reasoning is often seemingly [much
more rigorous][sequences] than my peers', and too often I get bogged down trying
to cross the [inferential distance] rather than the point I'd prefer to be
making. And so I thought it'd be really nice to just have the ability to
convince people that I know what I'm talking about. If they have their doubts
still, I would provide citations to encourage [others to level-up as well][along
for the ride]. And of course, I would only use my powers for good.

Of course, calling it "*Power Word: Trust*" is just [rule of cool], but saying a
single word would certainly be logistically easier than needing to draw circles
in blood and chant incessantly.

<!--more-->

Unfortunately, I couldn't think of creating such a magic spell, so for the mean
time it remains sitting in my mind, biding its time. One day.

A few days later, I read [Brienne Strohl][brienne]'s fantastic post about
[hacking social anxiety with Lob's theorem][hacking-lob]. Go read it right now,
if you haven't. It's absolutely fascinating and you will learn things and become
a better human. If you're lazy and aren't going to read it despite my glowing
recommendation, essentially Brienne realizes that if she believes that a long,
drawn out process will fix her problems, she might as well just skip the long,
drawn out process and reap the benefits without doing any of the work. And she
derives it with math. Sick.

Let me stress how cool this is. It's cooler than being cool. It's colder than
outer space during an ice age (that doesn't make sense but you can shut your
face hole, please). Brainhacking is neat and I'm especially interested in
meta-level brain hacks that I can use to install other way-cool brain hacks.

That night, I woke up at 3am. This is not a usual occurrence for me, and, being
in an inspired-yet-sleep-deprived mood, I decided that I'd give it a go. I was
going to use Lob's theorem to fix something in my brain.

But I didn't really have anything on hand to fix. I'm sure there's something
there, but I haven't identified it yet. Not being one to lose inspiration due to
mere *details*, I decided to take it a little further. I was going to use Lob's
theorem to install a generalized version of Lob's theorem in my mind, so that I
could effortlessly install beliefs into my head when I figured out what I wanted
to believe.

[sequences]: http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Sequences
[inferential distance]: http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Inferential_distance
[along for the ride]: /blog/along-for-the-ride
[rule of cool]: http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/RuleOfCool
[brienne]: http://enterthoughts.blogspot.com/
[hacking-lob]: http://enterthoughts.blogspot.com/2014/02/lobs-theorem-cured-my-social-anxiety.html


## Power Word: Believe

Essentially what I wanted to do was install *Power Word: Believe* into my mind.
A word that I could say to convince myself of something. There is no sense to
need to go through all the work of *actually believing something* each and every
time you want to do it, so, being a software engineer, I decided that I would
wrap it in a function. Because I needed to work out the actual *implementation*
of how this would all work, I would need to be able to write it down. And do
math. I spent a few minutes searching the internet for cool arcane symbols I
could use (again, rule of cool. If I'm going to be deriving math that will let
me change the fabric of reality, I might as well consider myself a wizard), and
came up with &#8485;[^1], which of course is pronounced "*Power Word: Believe*".

So I grabbed my notebook, and ran a bath in which I sat, meditating
analytically, looking for a way of sneaking this idea into my mind.
Occasionally I would write something that looked like [modal logic] in my
notebook. I had looked up what [Lob's theorem][lob] looks like in modal logic,
and I was trying to generalize it so I could install anything. This turns out to
not be possible (or else you could prove everything), but I wanted it to be so.
At least, in the context of my mind. [I really, really wanted it to be
so][bottom line].

I tried relentlessly to hook this belief into my mind, but it was no use. I knew
that [wanting to believe] is an error in thinking, and I've spent the last six
years attempting to identify when I'm making errors in my thinking so that I
will hopefully *stop*. And here I was, wanting to believe.

It was **uncomfortable**, and rightfully so. I actually gave out a cry of
anguish at 4am in the morning as I made a little ground. It felt like splitting
a fissure into my mind. It was the dirtiest I've ever felt in my life, trying to
believe something that I knew wasn't true. That's an official No-No in the
rationality handbook.

My last attempt in this session was to derive what I wanted out of Lob's theorem
directly. Recasting the necessity operator (&#9633;) as "known to be true" and
the possibility operator (&#9671;) as "believed to be true", I derived my own
version of [doxastic logic], though I was not very rigorous in doing so. I've
never been all that good at math. One of my axioms was that &#9671; &#9671; p =
&#9671; p, which is to say, "believing that you believe something" is the same
as "believing something". I believed that I had read this on LessWrong, since I
remembered an article called "[Belief in Belief]", and remembered that our
thoughts on how we see the world are in fact our thoughts on our thoughts on how
we see the world. There's always an [invisible level of indirection][no idea]
when talking about beliefs.

Anyway, this axiom turns out to be 100% false. Bad. Very bad. Don't try to do
mathematics with wrong axioms. Like a sports car, it might get you places, but
unlike a sports car, it won't make you happy. Finally I actually went back and
read "Belief in Belief" and realized I was being stupid. I acknowledged being
stumped.

I started looking for different ways of creating *Power Word: Believe*. As its
name might suggest, this would be extremely powerful if it worked, AND there was
an example of it working in the real world AND SO the only thing that was
holding me back must have been my own mind. And I'll be damned if I'm going to
accept arbitrary barriers from my damn self. My first thought was psychedelic
drugs. Maybe I could get into a weird state of mind where I would believe
&#8485; temporarily, and then use on itself to install it temporarily [
&#8485;<sub>drugs</sub>(&#8485;<sub>permanent</sub>) &rarr;
&#8485;<sub>permanent</sub> ]. This is what I like to call, "thinking outside of
the box". Unfortunately(?) I did not have any psychedelic drugs on hand, and so
I did not pursue this train of thought any further.

But instead of giving up, I took it around the community. I went to my first
LessWrong meetup in the Bay Area, and asked the smart people there. Reactions
were varied, and some people had some good ideas, but nothing worked. I ended up
asking Brienne herself about it at a [MIRI] party she happened to attend, and
while she seemed interested, there was too much festive event-partying going on
to talk too much about it.

All seemed fruitless.

And then my good friend [Jacob] send me a stupid facebook message about how he
had convinced himself that he could hear a classmate's name in a song, and it
made him laugh hysterically. Being intrigued for other reasons (and
procrastination), I watched the music video and found that I too could hear the
classmate's name in lyrics I explicitly knew did not contain it. And then it
struck me. **I could convince myself of something I knew to be false**. This is
what I had been trying to do for weeks! *This was it!*

Weeks ago I had read the relevant LessWrong sequences explicitly around beliefs,
but I had skipped one because I knew what it was talking about and it didn't
seem relevant, and boy-oh-boy was I wrong about that. The post in question was
"[Making Beliefs Pay Rent][rent]", and it talks about how the only worthwhile
beliefs are those which constrain your anticipations. Holding a belief should
force you to expect to see the world differently than if you didn't hold it, and
if it fails to do so, it is a useless belief.

Herein was the key! I didn't need to believe that &#8485; be true, I just needed
to let the belief that the (belief that &#8485; be true) *constrain my
anticipation*. Whoa. We're getting meta here, and I haven't personally sorted
through the meta levels of what I'm saying, so there might be type-errors in
there somewhere. Don't get your shorts bunched around it, because that's not the
point. The point is this:

Installing &#8485; is suddenly obvious. I just need to convince myself of the
inside of the first level of brackets in
&#9671;(&forall;p. &#9671;(&#8485;p &rarr; p)) &rarr; &#8485;. If it holds for
all cases, then it must be true in general! What I'm trying to express with my
mathematics here, is that I needed to perform lots of thought experiments of the
form "not p. invoke &#8485;. p.", enough that I could convince myself that it
holds for all p (via induction by example, which, as we all know, is the best
kind of induction).

And so I started. I imagined myself being unable to speak to an attractive girl
at a bus stop, and then &#8485; escaped from my lips (as a glyph, no less!), and
suddenly I could talk to this woman, and she was rapt with attention and we hit
it off exceptionally well.

And then I stopped. There was a flaw in my plan. I could feel it there, but I
couldn't place where exactly. Something felt wrong. I was missing a piece of
logic in my mind. And so, like I always do when I feel like I'm missing a piece
of logic in my mind, I went back and read LessWrong. In particular, I reread the
posts I had read recently, and then it dawned on me.

My beliefs need to pay rent. My beliefs need to regulate my anticipation. After
I've gone through all of the work of installing &#8485; into my mind, invoking
&#8485;*p* isn't going to make me anticipate *p*, unless *p* is small and
trivial and self-explanatory. *There is no shortcut*. &#8485; as we've explored
it can't exist, because it is a paradox: the only way to make it usable is to
ensure that it won't work.

This is to say that we can't front-end load the work on this. We can't construct
the spell in advance. We can't craft a general purpose spell that will let us
believe useful things. We need to craft the spell each and every time. Luckily,
we have a spell sketch (draw parallels to a proof sketch -- we know how to
construct it but we can't generalize the procedure).

Brienne actually touches on this in her blog post when she mentions the [miracle
question], and while she talks a fair amount about it, mentioning that it started
her along the path to her solution, I feel like she is missing the trees for the
forest. The miracle question didn't help her find the solution, the miracle
question *is* the solution! The miracle question forces you to sit down and
constrain your anticipations to your belief. It acts as the spell sketch.

The secret here is to go into your brain and say "(something is wrong.
&#8485;<sub>p</sub> would fix that. what would &#8485;<sub>p</sub> look like?
&#8485;<sub>p</sub> fixes it.) &rarr; &#8485;<sub>p</sub>". We are calling a
magical function into existence by observing that it would work if it did exist,
and realizing that we've got the ability to make it exist.

Bam. Mafuckin' wizardry, yo.

[^1]: This is 100% not the glyph I used in my notebook, but after hours of
searching for the one I did use, I had no luck and so am instead going with the
relatively arcane symbol for a strange system of measurement called the "ounce".

[modal logic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_logic
[lob]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Löb's_theorem
[wanting to believe]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/
[bottom line]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/js/the_bottom_line/
[doxastic logic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doxastic_logic
[Belief in Belief]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/
[no idea]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/om/qualitatively_confused/
[MIRI]: http://intelligence.org/
[Jacob]: http://www.jabrahams.ca/
[rent]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/
[miracle question]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solution_focused_brief_therapy#Questions


## Power Word: Cause

I've realized what was wrong with my initial stipulation: I don't want to
believe things; I want to cause things. My (meta) beliefs about beliefs are
useless, but my (object) beliefs about the world are actionable. &#8485; is thus
not to be pronounced "*Power Word: Believe*", but instead "*Power Word:
**Cause** *".  Belief has nothing to do with it. This change in framing I think
implies that I've successfully installed &#8485;. It no longer changes my mind.
It now makes things happen, and that's what really I had set out to do all
along.

Brains are surprisingly finicky about framing.


## Going Forwards

I haven't yet invoked &#8485;, though I have absolutely no doubt it would work.
Well, almost. I know that I can't *actually, directly* CAUSE things. I can't say
*&#8485;(I can breathe water) => I can breathe water* and expect it to work. I
need causal arrows from my belief to the world, and right now, &#8485; is too
weak a spell to jeopardize.

First I need to [compartmentalize] it. I need a context in which I can
dissociate myself from it should it not work, if I accidentally overestimate my
causal influence on a phenomenon. Without it, one wrong turn might cause my
magic spell to self-destruct, and it seems too valuable to subject to such
risks.

But what's truly holding me back is that dark arts mind hacking is scary. It's
scary as hell. Like [Moldbug says][UR], it's "a lot like do-it-yourself brain
surgery. It requires patience, tolerance, a high pain threshold, and very steady
hands". I am not going to start casting &#8485; willy-nilly, because I'm afraid
of corrupting my brain. The benefits of it need to very probably outweigh the
unknown risk of unforeseen interactions with other beliefs currently tenants of
my mind.

I'll find a use for this spell, but with great power comes great responsibility.
But still, in the meantime, being a wizard is *pretty frickin' cool*.

[compartmentalize]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/jhs/dark_arts_of_rationality/#intentionalcompartmentalization
[UR]: http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007_04_01_archive.html

