---
layout: post
title: "Part 1: The Fucking Asshole"
description: "In which we meet Rasmus"
category: stories
date: 2014-08-27 12:00:00
tags: stories

imagefeature: tokyo.jpg
comments: true
share: true
---

I first met Rasmus during an impromptu game of beer-pong. My participation in
the game was not voluntary, but necessitated by an Estonian woman who took her
beer-pong very seriously. Rasmus didn't have a partner, but he did now. He left
buying the beer to me. What a nice guy.

Thirty minutes later, in an attempt to forget our humiliating loss at beer-pong
(I was tackled to the floor three times by a girl who probably weighs half of
what I do), and because he had a flight at 4am for which he wanted to be *as
drunk as possible*, Rasmus and I head to a nearby pub. We were accompanied by
another denizen of the hostel, Dave from Britain. Rasmus offered to buy the
first round, and returned with three huge mugs of beer. "In Denmark, if you do
not buy the largest beer, you are a *fucking asshole*," he said by way of
explanation. I didn't complain.

Rasmus is a man with a tattoo of a wizard emblazoned on his right forearm --
a wizard smoking more marijuana than should be humanly possible.  He's
originally from Denmark, but has spent the last few months traveling through
eastern Europe. Rasmus once described himself to me as "hard as fuck", and he
takes self-sufficiency to the next level: throughout the entirety of his
travels, he has never once looked at a map or made a phone call.  He uses
internet cafes to make plans a few days in advance, and memorizes whatever
directions are on the hostels' websites. On more than one occasion he has
misremembered these directions, and subsequently spent the next few hours lost.
I asked why he didn't seek help; "If you ask for help, you are a *fucking
asshole*."

Rasmus told us a story of how the Danish flag descended directly from the
heavens, and signaled the Danish awakening from the Germans, or something like
that. Admitting that I knew nothing about Denmark, I asked him to explain. "We
Danish hate the Germans. They are like our older, cooler brothers. The *fucking
assholes*."

The three of us -- Rasmus, Dave and I -- swapped stories, and somehow settled
on the topic of unique slang words from our various countries, in an activity
Dave described as "cultural exchange". My companions liked my contribution of
"salty", but the winning entry was "chuffing brill" from the British
contingent.  Rasmus taught us some rude hand gestures, and then told us he
hated Britain because everyone called him "darling" and "love". "*Fuck you*,
man. You don't even know me, you *fucking asshole!*" Dave and I laughed. Rasmus
scowled at us.

A decision was made to go bar-hopping; we ended up at a bar called DM Baar.
I idly wondered what the DM might stand for, but realized immediately upon
entering from the horrifying visages staring at us from the wall. *Depeche
Mode*. Somehow we had managed to find a Depeche Mode-themed bar. In *Estonia*
of all places! We stayed, despite the tacky decor, because we needed
*somewhere* to drink, and besides, it was kind of funny. On our way out,
I asked the bartender if he ever got tired of Depeche Mode. He looked at me
like this was the stupidest thing anyone had ever said. Rasmus called him
a "*fucking asshole*" under his breath, and then did one last shot for the
road.

I don't know if I've ever seen anyone as drunk as Rasmus was that night; he
tried to pee on somebody on our way back. We got home around 3am, and I went
straight to bed.. Whether or not he made his flight is anyone's guess, but he
wasn't at the hostel the next day. Some sick part of me hopes he missed it --
I imagine he'd have some strong words for the airline, and I bet I know what
they would be.

Wherever he is right now, I'm sure he'll be fine. Rasmus is hard as fuck.

