---
layout: post
title: Sandy Runback
date: 2015-07-21 11:07
comments: true
tags: feels
---

I'm not normally much of the sentimental type, but today I found something [on
this day][otd] on Facebook that needed some commentary. Seven years ago, I
changed my name to Sandy Maguire. It was probably the best thing I've ever done,
and they've *certainly* been the best years of my life -- though I'm not sure
that last point is relevant.

[otd]: https://www.facebook.com/onthisday/

<!--more-->

Let's recap quickly. I was born Alexander Maguire, and went by Alex for most of
my life. I never really liked the name Alex -- it was too common in my age group
(the 28th most popular name when I was born, and steadily working its way
towards the coveted #1 spot ever since), but perhaps more damningly, I never
*identified* as an Alex. I'm not sure why. Unfortunately, as a child I lacked
the agency to do anything about this. I spent 18 years feeling vaguely
discontent about the whole state of affairs.

2008 came along. I graduated from high school. Most of my friends were leaving /
had left already to go to university, but I had decided to take a year off and
relax. Sadly, my records from back then are pretty sparse, but I'm relatively
certain Facebook had just unrolled their "Change your Name" feature. I clicked
on it, mostly as a joke, and typed in the first thing that came to mind.

"Sandy Maguire"

I liked the ring of it. But also I had just finished watching [The OC][oc],
where the adopted father of the main character is this radical dude named Sandy
Cohen who embodied all of the ideals I've ever admired. He's loyal,
kind-hearted, witty, and just a through-and-through good guy. He's a champion of
justice, protector of the weak, and is truly incorruptible. Also he has
fantastic eyebrows.

[oc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_O.C.

!["You chose to name yourself after *me*?"](/images/sandy-runback/sandycohen.jpg)

It seemed like a fitting name. So I pressed *Enter* and made it official. I was
now Sandy Maguire. That was the easy part.

Changing your identity is *hard*<sup>&#91;citation needed&#93;</sup>, but I'm
pretty sure it's **much harder** to do it in a small town where you know or have
heard an embarrassing story about *literally* everyone your age. I had changed
my name on Facebook, but that day I learned that just because it's on Facebook
doesn't make it true.

It was weird. Most people simply **refused** to call me Sandy. "It's just a
phase," they'd say. "Fuck you," I'd reply, but quietly. I couldn't understand
it; who are these people to say what I can and can't be called? My name is what
*I* choose it to be; you don't get any say in the matter!

This line of reasoning didn't fly, and so all of a sudden I found myself
alienated from most of the people I knew. Instead of being sad about it and
continuing to fight, I just found new people to be friends with and introduced
myself as Sandy. Problem solved. Over a period of two weeks, I had almost
churned my way through an entire social group.

Such an event was good for a few reasons: it served as a great filter for people
who respected my wishes, and (because very few people made it past that) gave me
a chance to reinvent my public persona. Lots of changes took place, but in
retrospect, one of the most important was that I stopped being afraid to take
chances to embarrass myself. Previously, I had kept many of my embarrassing
moments to myself, wanted to sustain the idea that I was "cool". I was afraid
people would stop liking me otherwise.

As a matter of fact, some people *did* stop liking me, but now I knew how easy
it was to replace people. I realized that if people didn't like me, that was
their problem, not mine. Confidence: it's pretty good stuff. This might just be
"growing up", but the timing was rather impeccable.

Unfortunately, there are some people it's harder to replace. My parents were
pretty good about trying out my new name, but seven years later, there are still
some extended family members who aren't on-board. I've been putting up with it
up until now because I don't see them very often, but it seems fair to stop
responding to Alex around them after seven years of deprecation time.

These days I go by lots of monikers: Sandy, Santino, tino, and any fun variants
thereof. It's easier to switch now; I'm not sure if this is because people are
used to my name being fluid now, or if the changes just aren't drastic. Or maybe
people just become less-shitty as they age. Probably some combination of the
three.

I don't have any wise knowledge to impart on this topic, just wanted to share an
experience that was formative and important to me. There are lots of parallels
to draw here, but I'll leave that for the philosophers.

Back to regularly-scheduled content soon.

