---
layout: post
title: Reflections on a Dumb Phone
date: 2017-10-29 12:55
comments: true
tags: reflections
---

Two weeks ago, I went down to AT&T and bought a \$35 flip phone. I was tired of
picking glass shards out of my thumb after my Nexus 5x encountered one too many
g-forces and had its screen shattered. But mostly I was tired of this goddamn
"always connected" culture we've somehow cultivated.

I was going off the grid, at least, off the mobile grid. I expected it to be a
little scary -- how can someone like me, someone who works in tech, survive in
this Western day and age without a smartphone?

It wasn't. After a few days, it began to feel very liberating.

The first thing I noticed was the battery life on this beast: something like ten
days. I'm sure that you could spin that out into twenty with the same sorts of
planning you can use to get two days out of your smartphone. I went to San
Francisco for a week. I didn't bring a charger. It was fine.

The impressive battery life here is to be expected, I suppose; literally the
only things this baby does are making calls, sending texts, and setting alarms.
Ostensibly it can browse the internet, but it requires a wifi connection and I
haven't tried it. There are no games on it, let alone any kind of app
marketplace.

I stopped bringing my phone places. During the era of owning a smartphone, I
couldn't fathom being out of my apartment for more than two minutes without my
phone. It just Wasn't Done. The fecklessness of this didn't strike me until the
first time I brought my dumb phone for the ten minute journey down to the
convenience store below my building. Why did I even need a phone for that
trip? To spend the unbearably long 45 seconds in the elevator mindlessly
scrolling through Facebook? Just in case someone sent me a Snapchat that needed
to be viewed *now*?

It's pretty silly when you stop and think about it.

Maybe it's just in my friend group, but there seems to be a higher burden behind
sending a text than sending some sort of chat message. This means people bother
me for less banal shit, but I'm still contactable for important things (like
hanging out in person!) And when we do hang out, I'm no longer tempted to ignore
these people in my immediate vicinity for meaningless things happening to other
people far away.

That's not to say the entire thing has been positive, however. One thing I'll
say about having a smartphone is that it makes "not having a plan" a more viable
option. I damn near missed a flight because I would always use a ride sharing
app to get around. Guess what functionality doesn't exist on my feature phone?

My friend and I were out one night and the Denver weather had dropped something
like 15C since we'd last been outside. We both started shivering, and, being in
an unexplored part of town, weren't entirely sure what to do. My usual
strategies would be to look up somewhere nearby and open, head there, and figure
it out -- but her hands were too cold to operate her phone, and mine didn't have
the requisite functionality.

We walked home in silence through the biting winds. It sucked.

Now I have the number of a local cab company stored in my quick-dial. I haven't
used it yet, but I'm kind of excited about the whole thing. I've decided I want
to start optimizing my life for interesting situations. Cab dispatchers usually
aren't the most scintillating people on the phone, but you have to admit, it's
much more capable of engendering an interesting situation than I'd ever get in
the Lyft app.

I'd like to leave you with this thought: if, deep down, you've noticed a growing
dissatisfaction with the world, consider if it might be caused by always being
connected to things you fundamentally don't really care about. If it might
be caused by faceless advertisers buying and selling your attention. If it might
be caused by push notifications from Google Now telling you that something
terrible has happened halfway across the world.

If any of this rings true to you, maybe try going for a week without your
smartphone on you every moment of every day.  Maybe you'll have to bring a book
with you to keep yourself entertained in periods of extended downtime. Maybe
someone won't be able to contact you *right this second*, and, come to think of
it, maybe that's OK.

