---
layout: post
title: Perpetual January
date: 2018-02-01 13:57
comments: true
tags: effectiveness, life, goals, analytics, review
related:
  - perpetual-motion
  - 2017-review
  - stories-from-2015
---

## Narrative

Holy moley -- is it February already? It seems to have gone so quickly, but
somehow, simultaneously, exceptionally slowly. I attribute the latter to the
sheer wealth of experiences I've had over the last month. It's amazing what you
have time for when you don't spend 40+ hours a week working a bum job.

2018 rolled in with me sleeping through the New Year festivities. I had just
arrived in Canada from Bangkok, experiencing a 50&deg;C temperature difference
negotiated only with shorts and tank tops, and a mean thirteen hours of jet-lag.

Somehow in my delusional frozen and sleep-deprived state, I had convinced the
waitress the night before to give me her number. The swathes of old people I
spend the evening with didn't exactly help my game, but they were all very
excited for me -- and gave a lot of unsolicited dating advice that hadn't been
relevant since the 60s, if ever.

Being in Canada meant my phone didn't work, so I was forced to call the cute
waitress. I got voice mail, where I was told to leave my name and number, and
she'd get back to me. She didn't. That's OK.

The next day I was back to work, and after about an hour of it, decided this
whole working-for-the-man thing [wasn't for me][retirement]. I called my boss
and quit. So far it's been the best decision I've made all year.

[retirement]: http://sandymaguire.me/blog/reaching-climbing/

I spent the next week hanging out with my family whom I hadn't seen in a year
and a half. We went snowshoeing, walked around a bunch of lakes, debated
libertarianism, chatted about Bell Labs, went hunting for Innis & Gunn, and they
graciously let me spend my evenings teaching them linear algebra. I'm not sure
how much of it sank in, but it was sweet of them to humor me.

We also went to visit Grandma. She's hella hella old and a year ago was told she
wouldn't have more than three months to live. She's no longer herself, and as
hard as it was to see her, I've got to give it to the old bird, that protestant
work ethic is as strong as ever -- I'm convinced it's the only thing keeping her
in her mortal coils. It was hard to see her, but I'm glad I did.

A big goal of January was to "figure out where to be." My assumption was
Thailand, but I'm tired of moving around (I've moved 15 times in the last seven
years.) The thought of needing to do a visa run every month didn't resonate with
my inner Buddha, plus the unpredictability of whether or not I'd get said visa
brought up a lot of neuroses. I'd always promised myself that I'd move to
Lithuania when I retired, and here I was, retired, so... why not?

The assumption was that I couldn't get a visa. I spent a few days researching
clever ways of getting into the EU -- looking for ancestry ties I could claim,
or business-visa loopholes, or whether I could register as a refugee. No dice.
But then I learned that Lithuania has a cultural exchange program with Canada,
and that I was eligible. So that was pretty cool.

The only problem was that I needed to apply in person in Ottawa, which was a
five hour and \$400 flight away from me. The embassy was not particularly
organized, and I found myself wondering on several occasions whom the ambassador
had pissed off in order to find himself posted in Canada.

So I flew to Ottawa. I have some family who lives there, with whom I'd spent the
best summer of my life getting into trouble in Vancouver a few years previous. I
hadn't seen them since, but they offered to let me stay with them. The magic
wasn't gone, and our shenanigans came back. One particularly good night was
spent at the Laff where we convinced the band to play only Sublime songs for the
entirety of the evening and met a bunch of wacky characters. There was the guy
who got drunk and video called me with his shirt off at 4am later that night.
There was the woman who had just been informed of being divorced a few hours
later and had decided to show up at the bar in her pajamas.

Good times were had.

I made it to the Lithuanian embassy, where the ambassador and I spent about an
hour trying to scan my fingerprints. He had never done it before, so he was on
the phone to his secretary, and she was trying to walk him through it. His
English wasn't very good (although it's significantly better than my
Lithuanian), and so the entirety of his instructions to me was to "PUSH IT PUSH
IT PUSH IT PUSH IT PUSH IT." We were both visibly relieved when the computer
finally accepted them. He took my \$100, and promised he'd give me \$9 in change
the next day when I came to pick up my visa. I suggested he just go buy a coffee
with it and give me the change. He didn't think that was very funny and I
decided to not push my luck any further.

The next day I came to collect my visa, and the feeling of elation was
overwhelming. This small piece of paper ironed into my passport represented the
culmination of my dreams over the last four years -- retiring early and ending
up in Lithuania.

As a nod to my Canadian heritage, I decided to do a pilgrimage to Parliament. I
went on the free walking tour, and met a woman who "accidentally" attempted to
smuggle a giant, illegal butterfly-knife past the security checkpoint, as well
as a guy from Montreal who was bored that day and decided to drive down for the
free walking tour. Our guide was a tiny, perky woman with a concerning amount of
zeal for war. I convinced everyone with my knowledge of the structure of the
Canadian government, but my jokes about how the Vietnam war was the one war the
entire world participated in fell flat. I thought it was hilarious.

Ottawa was cold. And then warm. And then cold again. My \$20 Value Village
jacket was having a hard time keeping up with the unpredictable (and frankly
insane) weather. A friend of my family's invited us out for dinner to meet me,
and then he blew us all off -- after we'd braved a blizzard to get there. But I
got a kebab and so the night wasn't entirely a write-off.

I found myself back in Denver, where my friends had organized a welcome-back
party. One guy came all the way from Ireland to wish me back, which was pretty
cool of him. He was supposed to be sleeping on my couch for the last few days,
but my unexpected trip to Ottawa had accidentally slashed those plans. Sorry, my
dude! My heart melted a little bit by this awesome coming together from my
friends. I've never felt so loved.

Since I'm retired and now have what you might call a "fixed income," I decided
that investing in a library card would be a good way to cheaply work on my
reading goal. The woman at reception gave me one, and suggested the seventh
floor would be a good, quiet place to get some work done. I took her advice and
headed up there, popping into the only room that didn't have a "staff only" sign
on it. Inside was a giant table, hand crafted, and embedded with plaques with
the names of famous politicians from the late '90s. I sat at the one labeled
"Jean Chr&eacute;tien", obviously. The police showed up soon after to gently
escort me out.

The next day I was run over on my way back to the library. I wasn't hurt, but
seeing as it was the one time I've been in Denver and not jaywalked. The irony
is thicc.

Finally, I spent a bunch of time in January working on a new video game, and
[have started a series of blog posts about the development of it][dev], if you
find yourself interested in the process behind these things. I also experienced
the joy of painting for the first time in a year, and prepared and performed a
set for an open mic stand-up night.

[dev]: http://reasonablypolymorphic.com/tags/devlog.html


## Mundane Epiphanies

January has been the most enjoyable month I've ever experienced in living
memory. It's remarkable how lovely it is to have the freedom to chase
inspirations on a whim, without any external responsibilities to get in the way.
Having an extra 40 hours of time, and all the associated energy that comes with
it also goes a long way.

I also can't remember ever feeling so good in my own skin. I walk around these
days with a swagger of which I didn't previously realize I was capable.
Relatedly, I find myself getting significantly more complements than I ever was
before. There's something to be said about self-confidence here, and when I wrap
my mind around what it is, I'll write more. Count on it, baby baby.

Often I feel like I'm remarkably dumb for how smart I am. I had a few instances
of that in January -- the most salient of which was "wow, my energy levels are
*strongly* dependent on what kind of food I eat." I mean, it's obvious, and was
something I knew intellectually, but I'd never really *realized* it. Without
having any external variables, the correlations here became immediately evident.
I shudder to think of what other dumb things I know but don't *know* that will
make other drastic improvements in my life -- if you can think of any, please
suggest it in the comments below!

One of my focuses of the year is to get good at meeting people and building
relationships. This has paid off already; I feel like I've made two *fantastic*
friends in January -- like, seemingly god-tier quality friendships. We'll see if
they can survive the honeymoon phase, but I have a really good feeling about
them.


## Analytics

Across the board, I'm doing pretty well on my yearly goals. They say what gets
measured gets done, and that's a pretty apt observation of January.

The 50,000 foot goal for January was to "Set the foundation for the year. Get
into the habit of doing the things you want to be doing. Quit work, figure out
where to be. Deal with banking bureaucracy." I'm still working through the
bureaucracy of banking, but the rest of it got done.

In term of the things I'm actually quantifying, it's also looking promising. The
following numbers are what I've accomplished out of what I would have needed in
order to be on track for the year:

* Writing: 12488 / 6625 words
* Books: 5.52 / 4.42 books
* Category Theory: 25 / 23 pages through Awodey
* Meeting People: 42 / 44 people
* Reaching Out: 7 / 9 people
* Dates: 1 / 52 unique people

Meeting people and reaching out is pretty trivial -- I'll probably knock those
out and get back up to being on track today or tomorrow.

The dates category is the only thing that project managers would call "in the
red." It's off-track, and in danger of working out given its current trajectory.
I've got a few excuses for this: I was traveling for half the month without an
actual base of operations, and I was barely managing to not die of cold, let
alone look good. I've actually been on four dates, but they've all been with the
same woman. The days in January I decided to focus on meeting women didn't go
particularly well, so I'm going to need to come up with a new strategy if I
[don't want to lose all my friends][tactics].

[tactics]: /blog/perpetual-motion#tactics-and-mechanics

Unrelatedly, I've been choosing a "key focus" for every day, and tracking
whether or not I meet it. I've missed 5 / 33, although one was due to being
run-over, and two were "mostly complete." Having a key focus has been fantastic
for motivating myself to accomplish a particular thing; it's generally the first
thing I knock off in the day, and leads to a wonderful feeling of being
productive for the rest of my hours. This is probably the biggest life hack I'd
suggest picking up, if you're looking for something like that.

I have a few other goals for the year that I haven't made any real progress on.
I'm in discussions with the maintainer of an open source project, looking for
ways to contribute, but so far it's been less than productive. I haven't started
anything that could be considered academic, nor have I spent any time building a
community.

It feels a little weird to end this post on such a low note, since January's
been such a dope month. I'm having the time of my life, accomplishing more than
I thought was possible, and plan to only get better and doing these things.

