---
layout: post
title: Sleepless Linguistic Blues
date: 2018-03-02 05:13
comments: true
confidence: 5
tags: lithuanian, analysis, crazy
---

I've been experiencing a lot of sleeplessness recently. I'm learning Lithuanian
right now, and instead of sleeping, my brain seems determined to chew the
language over and over again. Sleeplessness comes somewhat frequently to me, and
it's generally triggered by having something my mind really wants to work out.

Sometimes it's caused by learning cool new math, or in relation to somebody new
sleeping beside me. Less often than I'd like, on a particularly productive day
the wires will get crossed and I'll find my sleep-deprived brain trying to work
out the eigenvectors of this woman in my bed.

There's an implied urgency of knowing some of the language of the country you're
about to move to, and it's this that has been keeping me awake. My mind is
thrashing around, trying to grapple with genitives and locatives, and generating
random scenarios to see if I navigate my way through it.

It sort of feels like a sudoku puzzle on steroids. For example, I realize my
cellphone doesn't work in Europe, so I'm going to need to buy a new one. But I
don't know where to buy one. OK, I'll have to ask someone.

The words "kur" (where), "parduotuvė" (shop) and "telefonas" (telephone) seem
like they'd be useful in getting directions to the place. But these things are
both nouns, and stringing them together as-is would result in something along
the lines of "where is the shop the phone?" Someone patient might understand,
but you certainly wouldn't be making it easy for them.

OK, so, let's think about it. The "sporto klubas" is a "sports club" (which I
assume means "gym"). The "-o" suffix on "sporto" sounds like the genitive case
of a noun that ends in "-as", and among other things, the genitive can indicate
ownership. Maybe that makes sense, the gym is the club owned by a sport? If this
is indeed a reasonable line of argument, asking where the phone store might then
be "kur telefono parduotuvė?"

Good start. Assuming I can understand the directions received, I'll make it to
the phone store. [I want to buy a flip phone][dumb], so, how can we make that
happen? Well, "norėti" is the infinitive "to want", and it conjugates as "noriu"
in the first person present. For reasons I don't understand, "norėti" also takes
a genitive argument, so "noriu telefono" is a good starting point.
Unfortunately, this probably doesn't tell the guy at the phone store anything he
doesn't already know.

[dumb]: /blog/reflections-on-a-dumb-phone/

I don't know the word "flip", nor whether or not that translates literally
across the language barrier. So instead maybe I could say "simple phone" or
"basic phone" or "old phone". But I don't know any of those words! Maybe I could
get away with something more roundabout.

What I do know is the numbers (all the way up to twenty! wow!). Perhaps I could
say something along the lines of "if an iPhone is a 10, I want a 1." iPhone is
likely to survive the translation barrier, but maybe I should say Android
because I don't want them to think I want the iPhone 10.

It goes on like this endlessly and circuitously. It's nothing but mental
masturbation as far as I can tell, because in reality they'll have phones I can
point to and ask "kiek pinigai?" (how much money?).

But if we're being really really honest with ourselves, not even that is
necessary, because everyone speaks English anyway.

I'm going to go back to bed now.

