---
layout: post
title: "Review: Thimbleweed Park"
date: 2018-05-30 12:58
comments: true
tags: review, game
---

I've been confined to bed for the last week or so with the worst flu of my life.
It's not the end of the world or anything, but it means the [trouble I usually
have with filling my time][retire] has been exacerbated. As a result, I bought
the neo-classic point-n-click adventure game [Thimbleweed Park][thimbleweed] and
played through it in record time.

[retire]: /blog/get-out-and-build-things/
[thimbleweed]: https://thimbleweedpark.com/

You might not know this about me, but I have a strong affection for graphical
adventure games; the genre was a huge part of my childhood, and I'm unable to
count the aesthetic influences they've left on me. I've also [built a][devlog1]
[lot of][devlog2] [technology][devlog3] on which to create my own adventure
games, if I ever get around to it.

[devlog1]: http://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/starting-a-game-engine/
[devlog2]: http://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/action-menus/
[devlog2]: http://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/navigation/

But Thimbleweed Park is the first game of its kind that I've played for the
first time *as an adult.* While it was an enjoyable experience, it gave me a lot
of insight into why the genre hasn't persevered in the modern era. There are
lots of *good* things I can say about the game, but it seems more instructive to
focus on its negative points.


## Part 1: The Puzzles Don't Make Any Damn Sense

Without getting into any spoilers, a lot of the puzzles here are crap. There's a
running stereotype about how crap puzzles in adventure games can be, as
exemplified by [Gabriel Knight 3][kontaku]:

> In Gabriel Knight 3, Gabriel needs to get a motorbike to continue the story.
> But in order to get it, he has to disguise himself as long-suffering Detective
> Mosley. And in order to do THAT, he has to make a mustache out of cat-hair.
> Though Mosley doesn't have a mustacheâ€¦ so Gabriel will also have to draw a
> mustache onto Mosley's license so that his cat-mustache-using disguise looks
> like Mosley's ID.

[kontaku]: https://kotaku.com/5903932/how-we-survived-adventure-gamings-most-hair-tearingly-ridiculous-puzzles

Thimbleweed Park doesn't have anything that egregious, but it require a lot more
suspension of belief than I was capable. The game features multiple playable
characters, none of whom like one another nor seem very keen to help the others.
But that doesn't stop there from being puzzles that need to be solved
cooperatively between two or more characters. While in principle this is a fine
idea, the execution falls apart in most cases.

For example, at one point, my dude was kidnapped and brought into a sewer. There
was a payphone inside and a number I was supposed to call to get help. But I
didn't have a quarter to use the payphone! My other character did, however, and
the solution was to drop the quarter down a sewer grate for the kidnapped lad
to pick up. Despite the fact that the character with the quarter *didn't know*
the other guy was in the sewer, let alone that he was missing a quarter to make
a phone call.

I mean, sure, the solution to the puzzle makes sense if you're an omniscient
player, which technically I am, but that doesn't make it a *satisfying*
solution. It has no verisimilitude. If the guy in the sewer had some means of
contacting his partner and informing her of the situation, I would be fine with
it. But that's not how the game works.

A small problem, certainly, but it's endemic in the game. Later on, you need to
do cooperative problem-solving with a ghost playable character and your living
characters, but a huge plot point is that none of them know about the ghost, and
he is unable to communicate with them.

Oh, but then the solution to one of the puzzles is for the ghost to make a phone
call. BUT BY THIS POINT IT HAS BEEN VERY WELL ESTABLISHED THAT NOBODY LIVING CAN
HEAR HIM. This is inexcusable storytelling; it contracts the internal logic of
the world, and as a result *actively punishes* players for paying attention and
making inferences.


## Part 2: Ineffective Feedback

A classic trope in well-done adventure games is that if there's a silly,
arbitrary solution to a puzzle, that you'll get feedback when you do something
wrong if in the right vein. For example, maybe you're trying to get past
someone whom you know likes sour things. The solution is to offer them lemons,
but if you tried giving them lemonade you might get a response like "hey, this
is pretty good, but it doesn't really have enough kick. Got anything a little
more concentrated?"

Thems the rules. I don't mind hunting for arbitrary solutions to puzzles so long
as they're not illogical, and that my less arbitrary attempts are rewarded in
some way. Thimbleweed Park falls completely on its face on this front. And oh
god is it frustrating.

At one point, I needed to follow someone, but couldn't actually get close enough
to tail them. So I thought, maybe I should put something on their shoes so that
I could follow their footprints. I looked through my four characters'
inventories worth of stuff, and found a few reasonable candidates: ketchup and
soot. I tried using both, but the responses the game gave me were "nope, I don't
think this works with that." Like, it gave me the responses you get when you do
something so stupid and illogical that the developers couldn't even be fucked to
program in a response for it. Like trying to use a stick with the microwave, or
something. And so I gave up on that line of inquiry.

And then I got stuck for an hour. Because the solution was that I needed to put
*some other* item on their shoes. Some other item I had found, but hadn't known
I could pick up, because it was a liquid and I didn't have a suitable container.

I'll get back to this in a minute.

There's a corollary to this, which is that when the game DID give me feedback on
my incorrect solutions, it often would imply that my *completely wrong*
solutions were close. At one point in the game, you (the player, not the
character) are trying to get the plumbers to show up, You can mess with the
fountain, which temporarily makes significantly more water come out of it than
usual, and then goes back to normal after five seconds.

My adventure game brain interpreted this as "hmm, I need to find something I can
do in these five seconds in order to intensify the problem." But no, this is
unrelated. Don't get me wrong, I can appreciate the value of red herrings, but I
would have appreciated a little bit of dialog along the lines of "this doesn't
seem to be working" after ten tries or so.

The plumbing situation gets worse, however. There are lots of plumbing-related
problems you can cause, but most of them leave the proprietor saying "hmm, this
doesn't seem serious enough to call the plumbers." When you do come up with the
correct action, the proprietor then proceeds to call not the plumbers, but
maintenance, who tell him they can't do anything for him. Getting him to
actually talk to the plumbers instead of maintenance is a completely different
puzzle!

I understand that making these things is hard work, but this kind of thing is
pretty inexcusable. If the characters can't keep straight what they know and
what they don't, how in hell am I going to be able to?


## Part 3: Object Impermanence

Getting back to putting objects on people's shoes, that I had found but didn't
realize I could pick up because I didn't have a suitable container.

But! At one point in time I did have a suitable container to hold the necessary
liquid!

Thimbleweed Park is told via many flashbacks; you'll be working on a puzzle and
then an innocent piece of dialog with an unrelated character will send you back
in time as you play through someone's memory. And you can't switch back to the
puzzle you were solving until you've finished the flashback. It's jarring, but I
can't say I hated it.

However, during one of those flashbacks, I did in fact pick up the necessary
container to solve my shoe-tracking problem. But I picked it up in the
adventure game sense of "attempt to pick up every interesting-looking object in
the room, and sort it out later." I'm quite gregarious with this, and I don't
leave a room until I'm convinced I've interacted with everything in it to
exhaustion.

So anyway, the flashback ends, and an act later, I regain control of the
character from the flashback. Except that she hasn't kept all of the items I
picked up in the flashback -- though she has kept some. I haven't interacted
with her in an hour or two, and so I don't notice the missing item, nor do I
think to go back into the room I got it, since I assumed all of the content
there was already inspected.

This is more likely a bug than being bad game design, but it was a pretty
infuriating one to have run into.

There were other cases of this too though. One of the game's gags is three
characters who are all the same, but have different verbal tics. It's funny, if
a little overplayed, but at one point in act **1**, my character called him on
it, asking "aren't you the same as Guy A and Guy B?" Except that I hadn't met
Guy B yet, and was arbitrarily gated by the game from meeting him until several
hours of play through later. Again, it broke my immersion. Worse, it continued
to distract me for a few hours until I actually ran into Guy B, as I anticipated
the joke.


## Part 4: Arbitrary Goal Gating

Our ghost friend accomplishes everything he needs to do by part 4 or so, and
then just kind of waits around as a playable character until the end of the game
(part 8? 9?). As a result, I found myself often switching to him with a problem
in mind, and then fucking around for a little while and failing to solve my
problem before switching back.

This ghost dude of ours can walk through walls and open doors, which is the
solution to more than one puzzle. As a result, it starts training the player
that we can use him to solve puzzles involving otherwise inaccessible switches.
Except that he can't leave this haunt, except for that one time he could. It's
misleading, in the sense that he would be the perfect solution to a puzzle late
in the game, and has already been set up to be. Except that he can't get there,
so maybe the puzzle is to figure out HOW to get him there?

As it happens, that is not the solution. Furthermore, having the ghost be a
playable character with nothing to do reinforces the interactions he *does*
have. There's a bully who is preventing our ghost from leaving his haunt, and
obviously the solution is to have the ghost stand up for himself. But this is
never an option, and in all of your attempts to get past him through the later
acts, you learn that "nope, this is not a thing that is going to happen."

Except, inexplicably, it does! At the last act, with absolutely no intervention,
our ghost finally finds the courage to stand up to the bully. Worse than that,
not even do we get any hints that anything has changed. A quick line like 'I've
had it, sticking around in here. It's time to leave!" or something along those
lines would have been enough to lampshade the interaction.

But no. The intended solution is to just have learned nothing and to keep trying
the same thing that hasn't worked before until it does work.

This is nowhere near anything construable as "good game design."


## Conclusion

At the end of the day, Thimbleweed Park is mostly a good distraction from being
so ill you think you're going to die. If you're already a big fan of the genre,
I'd recommend it with all of the above caveats. But if you're not, skip this one
-- it's only going to leave a bad taste in your mouth. Go start with [Monkey
Island II][mi2], which is a vastly superior game, made by the same dude.

[mi2]: https://store.steampowered.com/app/32460/Monkey_Island_2_Special_Edition_LeChucks_Revenge/

