---
layout: post
title: Come to my house and take everything I own for free
date: 2018-02-27 18:42
comments: true
tags: life, travel, reflections
related:
  - scenes
  - comfort-zones
---

"Come to my house an take everything I own for free." That was the title of the
craigslist ad I left this morning at 7:30am. I wanted to post the ad early in
case nobody showed up and I was required to spend the day hauling a bunch of
crap IKEA furniture down the stairs by myself to be left surreptitiously on the
sidewalk.

My fears turned out to be naive and terribly, terribly unfounded. Within about
twenty minutes, I was getting three phone-calls a minute, and twice as many
texts. Fifteen minutes later the first people began to arrive. The high-ticket
items were claimed first as expected, but that didn't stop the droves of
unrelenting humans stampeding to claim my former possessions as their own.

Within two and a half hours, everything was gone. The furnishings which had made
up my life for the last few years had been taken away. In total, I'd say about
50 people physically showed up, 78 people texted me, and 61 other people called.
I suspect experiences like these are where the phrase "phone ringing off the
hook" come from. An hour later, all of the furniture had been deconstructed and
carted off.

It took me about six weeks of constant effort to build all of that stuff. Is
there any force in the universe more powerful than raw, unadulterated human
motivation?

However, as I watched them brave the broken elevators and the subsequent eight
flights of stairs, desperate for whatever they could get their hands on, I
couldn't help but feel bad for the disservice I was doing these people. There
was a reason I was getting rid of this *stuff*. Possessions make you cautious.
This ownership enforces the status-quo, and it makes you feel like you have
something to lose.

I felt bad because these people were (almost literally) breaking their backs in
order to unchain me from my burdens; I can't help but think they might have been
unwittingly shackling themselves while doing so. But they're adults, presumably
know what they're doing, and at the end of the day, I'm not one to judge. These
people did me a favor, and I'm grateful to them for that.

Getting rid of my possessions was the first real step towards [my year of
perpetual motion][motion], and tomorrow I set sail for new horizons and
adventures. With today marking my final day in the United States, I can't think
of a more symbolically compelling way to go out: unchained and reborn. It's a
fitting close for the end of an era.

[motion]: /blog/perpetual-motion/

