---
layout: post
title: An Easy Way to Change the World
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: strategy, history
related:
  - scenes
  - sad-murder-gandhi
  - shame
---

> A person is smart. People are dumb, panicky dangerous animals and you know it.
>
> -K, Men in Black

Back in the year 356 BC, there was a Greek man named Herostratus. Pretty cool
name, huh? If you're into that whole nominative determinism thing, this sounds
like a dude destined for great things.

Evidently Herostratus thought so too, despite the fact that he was likely of low
standing in society, and possibly even a slave. But Herostratus wouldn't let
that stop him. And so in an attempt to immortalize his name he decided to commit
an unspeakable atrocity: to destroy the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus. Fame at
any cost, he figured; better to be known for something terrible than to not be
known at all.

The Temple of Artemis might not mean much to you, but it's considered one of the
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. It's kind of like deciding you're going to
topple over Christ the Redeemer just to bask in the inevitable news cycle about
you that is bound to follow.

Anyway, back to Ephesus. To dissuade other potential copycat criminals, the
local authorities declared that Herostratus be subject to a damnatio memoriae --
"condemnation of memory". Which is to say that they decided Herostratus shall
not be remembered, and in a truly Orwellian fashion, they decided to wipe his
name from history.

Obviously they failed, because here we are talking about him, but you've got to
admit it's a pretty baller strategy. If someone is trying to take fame through
whatever means necessary, an effective strategy is to just ignore them.

Today I want to talk about damnatio memoriae, and why the heck don't we as a
society practice more of it.

You know how in Tom Clancy movies, the US government always makes a point of
saying "we don't negotiate with terrorists?" Same idea. The government doesn't
want to incentivize more terrorism by setting a precedent of saying "yeah, do
that and we'll give you whatever you want." That's only going to lead to more
terrorism.

If you can convincingly precommit to taking a certain action (not negotiating)
in response to some stimulus (having your family kidnapped, or whatever), people
won't engender that stimulus because they know it won't bring them closer to
their goals.

While we're on the topic of terrorism, let's chat about that for a bit longer.

You know how every time there's a terrorism attack, it's all over the news and
society at large collectively loses its shit? Everyone changes their Facebook
profile photos to something to show solidarity, and they send out their thoughts
and prayers and all that. It's all over the collective consciousness for like a
month afterwards, and we ask our politicians "what are you doing to protect us?"
and they use it as an opportunity to chip away at a few more of our liberties.
But I digress.

YOU GUYS.

Terrorism only works because we talk about it every damn time. Terrorists keep
doing it because they know they'll get our attention. That fits their agenda.
Know what wouldn't? If we just practiced some damn damnatio memoriae and agreed
that yes, it's sad, but no, we're not going to talk about it, all of this shit
would go away.

OK but it's scary right? WHO KNOWS WHERE MIGHT BE NEXT! MAYBE IT WILL BE US? No.
It won't. According to [all the statistics][stats] I can find, roughly 75 people
in the States die from terrorism every year. For comparison, [lightning kills
about 51 people][lightning] a year, and [cars kill about 38,000][cars].

[stats]: http://www.businessinsider.com/death-risk-statistics-terrorism-disease-accidents-2017-1
[lightning]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightning_strike#Epidemiology
[cars]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_motor_vehicle_deaths_in_U.S._by_year

In other words you should expect to die 500 times in a car before you will ever
be a victim of terrorism. How many times have *you* died in a car crash? For me
it's not even one time.

So I'd like to end this essay with a small call to action -- the next time some
shit goes down -- and let's face it, it will -- let's all just collectively keep
our shit. Let's *not* talk about it, let's not update our Facebook profile
photos. And instead, let's share this post you're currently reading without any
commentary on the tragedy du jour.

We can't directly stop people from doing bad stuff, but we can practice damnatio
memoriae and remove the incentives behind doing bad stuff. We can be the change
we want to see in the world, and all it requires is the self-control to make it
happen.


