---
layout: post
title: My Cool Friend Skaidre
date: 2018-03-05 13:19
comments: true
tags: stories, travel
confidence: 1
related:
  - stories-from-2015
---

After far, far too long I am finally back Vilniuje. Not only has it been too
long since my last visit, but also I arrived about 44 hours later than my
boarding card might have suggested. The entire journey is an epic saga, spanning
time and space, superposition, one hell of a lot of time spent in airports, and
a dad's sweater.

This is that story.

---

My trip started off so well and with much enthusiasm. I was intending to arrive
at the Denver airport the suggested three hours beforehand; with most of my new
life riding on getting out successfully, I didn't want to a "Sandy special" and
somehow miss my flight.

I was traveling light; the majority of everything I owned was in my luggage. All
I had brought on my person was a few electronics, two days worth of clothes, and
the essential toiletries. No warm clothes. I wasn't going to need them. Sure, it
was cold right then in Europe, but how often does a bag go missing?

Traffic on the way to the airport was light, and so I arrived almost half an
hour ahead of the three hour buffer I had allocated. Upon arrival, I was the
only person checking a bag, so I zipped through that line, and made it through
security in record time. It was the smoothest airport experience I had ever had.

The flight to Reykjavik was uneventful. The seat immediately beside me was
unoccupied, and across the gap was an amicable firefighter from Oklahoma on a
week-long trip to Iceland with his friend "away from the wives."

"What's in Oklahoma?" I asked.

"Not much. They probably wouldn't like you there," he replied.

Fair dos. We didn't chat much after that, but on our way off the plane he wished
me luck in my new life. The layover in Keflavik was short and uneventful,
although the red-eye nature of the first leg had left me a little loopy. I found
myself sitting next to a woman from Boston; we both found ourselves excited to
be speaking with someone else whose first language was English. She was on her
way to Copenhagen, and there probably wasn't going to be much more of
English-first-language in either of our lives.

I managed to get a few hours of sleep on the flight to Denmark, blissfully
unaware of how much of a shit-show the next few days of my life were going to
become.

Upon arrival in Copenhagen, I had a few hours to kill until heading to my gate
-- well, had I had a gate to go to. The departures board ominously marked my
gate in bold red letters as "info at 14:00" -- roughly an hour after the stated
departure time. I ate a famous Danish sausage of some sort, not because I was
particularly keen on it, but because it was the only food I could find in the
entire wing of the airport. It came with a beer, which helped.

14:00 rolled around, and the board in turn rolled over to its new message: "info
at 15:30". I don't know if you've ever been to terminal 3 of the Copenhagen
airport, but it's not exactly a place in which it is easy to spend several
hours. There is a noticeable lack of power outlets and edible food, and had
there not been wifi I'd go so far as to suggest the airport had a lack of basic
human necessities. That being said, wifi only goes so far without power, but it
sure helped the time go by.

Thank goodness for the wifi.

After what seemed like an eternity, 15:30 came by. The board maintained its
previous message for a hot minute, triggering the deepest anxieties within me.
My zen was being encroached upon. When finally, the screen refreshed with a new
status for my flight.

"Cancelled."

Terrific. An announcement came on over the board, and due to some divine
influence, I understood enough Danish to make my way to the transfer office and
attempt to sort out the situation. The transfer office was hopping; apparently
I'd gotten there slowly. The machine that was supposed to dispense numbers was
more of what you might call an machine that "in-pensed" numbers -- as it printed
them out they'd roll back into the machine's cavernous internals. I fucked with
it for a few minutes, trying to get my ticket out, during which time another big
wave of people came into the transfer office.

They knew something I didn't: there was another machine that successfully
managed to dispense the numbers whose expulsion make up the entirety of its
existence. I got my number: 323; the two tellers were currently serving 289. I
settled in for a long wait.

An entirely unhelpful man named Kristofer finally called my number. I missed it,
but noticed a few seconds later, and *charged* my way past the 324 girl on her
way to the desk. Not today, lady! BROTHA GOTTA MOVE!

Kristofer told me that my flight had been canceled (he didn't say why.) He
handed me a boarding pass for the next flight at 21:30, a meal voucher for
\$16.54, and a booklet explaining my rights as a traveler in Europe with a
cancelled flight. I bought a Guinness and small stew upstairs at the Irish
pub for \$21, and leafed through the pamphlet, eager to learn my rights. As it
happens, I don't have any: the airline is not responsible if the cancellation is
due to weather, technical issues, safety concerns, labor disputes, acts of god,
snakes, or any other of the possible reasons a flight might be cancelled. I
spent about fifteen minutes trying to come up with a plausible reason that might
cause a flight to be cancelled that *wasn't* covered by this law, and I couldn't
come up with even a single example.

I dug around online; the flight later that day was due to be on the same
aircraft as the one that had been cancelled. Seeing as the plane was still in
Italy, it didn't strike me as terribly likely that my 21:30 flight was going to
make it either. After having been awake for more than 24 hours, the thought of
spending another six hours in what I then thought was the world's second worst
airport (hi, Chicago -- O'Hare!) didn't fill me an effervescence of excitement.
I decided to change my flight to the next day, fought my way back through the
transfer center, and got a new boarding pass.

They kept my luggage overnight. "There was nothing in there I needed," I said.
"Great," she said, "I'll put new tags on it to make sure it ends up in Vilnius.
Hopefully it will see you there."

A quick taxi ride brought me to the [world's coolest looking hotel][cabinn],
where I checked in and went up to my room. My key didn't open the door. I came
back. The nice man gave me a new room, so I went up to there. I managed through
the door, and plopped down on the bed, thankful to not be in an airport for even
one more second. Today had been hell, but things were going to get better
tomorrow. I just knew it.

[cabinn]: https://www.google.dk/search?q=cabinn+metro&tbm=isch

I plugged my laptop into the wall, desperate to get some charge into the beast
before I conked out into an impressive sleep coma, but the little charging light
didn't come on. That was odd. I tried the other outlet. Nothing. I flipped the
light switch, and not even those worked. My room didn't have any power!

After packing my things back up, I once again headed for the lobby. I informed
the nice man that this room didn't have any damn power, and he looked at me like
I was stupid. "You need to put your key-card in the box by the door; that will
turn on the power." I went back to my room, and sure enough, the key-card did
engender electricity. I plugged my laptop in, had a shower, and woke up in my
bed sixteen hours later to the sound of my alarm going off.

Back to the airport. Day two in Copenhagen. My zen and my attitude had recharged
over the night, and I was ready to make the most of the experience. The only
time that exists is "now," and so if you don't love now, you're letting life
pass you by. Shitty Copenhagen airport or no, I wasn't going to let life pass me
by.

The day before I had been feeling nervous about meeting people in Europe, unsure
whether their English would be good enough for us to communicate. And besides,
the Scandinavian people aren't exactly smiley. But today I was feeling right as
rain and I not going to [flinch away][flinch]. Over breakfast I met a nice
Lithuanian girl named Krystina, and I was excited to practice my Lithuanian with
her. It didn't go very well, but she was very happy I was moving to Lithuania.
"I hope you like it!" She herself was flying to Kaunas, a city about an hour's
drive away from Vilnius. Her flight was earlier than mine, but she got out no
problem.

[flinch]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13159280-the-flinch

The departures board finally had a gate for my flight, and I headed there. The
gate, however, did *not* say it was going to Vilnius. Hmm. I asked around, and
the man I talked to said that on the internet, the flight was described as being
cancelled.

Well, I wasn't going to wait around for that, and besides, I'd learned my
lesson. Immediately I headed over to the transfer center, avoided the bad
machine, and was served quickly. The man at the counter confirmed that my flight
had been canceled, and started rerouting me. My trip gained a few more legs,
first to Gutenberg, then to Stockholm, then finally to Vilnius around 11pm. My
hostel stopped doing check-in at midnight, so this was a tight schedule, but as
long as my luggage came off the belt quickly, it was doable.

The man in the transfer center gave me my new boarding cards, and a meal voucher
good for \$12.40 to make up for the additional eight hours my flight was going
to take. I used it to buy another Guinness for \$12.07. They didn't give me
change.

In the intervening time, I wandered around the airport aimlessly. I met a woman
named Maria who worked at the concession stand in the lonely part of the
airport. She had just finished high-school, hated her life, hadn't read a book
in a few years if ever, and didn't want to race luggage trolleys with me; I took
off after some time despite how keen she was to have someone to talk to.

My flight for Gutenberg was uneventful, though short. The dude beside me was
clearly disinterested in talking and so we didn't. Forty five minutes later, I
found myself in Gutenberg where there was wifi ahoy and power outlets aplenty.
It felt like the chosen land. I ordered some food, and sat down. A Swedish woman
sat beside me, and we struck up conversation. I told her I had been playing a
game called "making eye contact with Scandinavians" which she didn't think was
very funny but I did.

I hopped on the flight to Stockholm, where I sat beside a man from Vilnius who
worked for a non-profit for reducing gender inequality. We had an interesting
chat about that, and he gave me some good tips for life amidst the Lithuanians,
being a foreigner himself.

We got to Stockholm. The departure board said to check back for info regarding
my gate. Fuck. It was becoming pretty clear I wasn't going to make it to Vilnius
by check-in time, so I tried to send a quick email to the hostel asking if I
could do a self-check-in. Unfortunately, as it happens, there is no free wifi in
the Stockholm airport, and nothing I attempted to do got around it. In
exasperation, I bought an hour of wifi, and the damn thing glitched out without
giving it to me. As I learned later, however, it did not fail to charge me \$10.

With my enthusiasm seemingly as low as it could be, I headed for the gastropub
and ordered a nice-ass looking burger and a beer. There was a cold-looking
Scandinavian dude sitting beside me, but I decided to take a chance and say hi
to him. This turned out to be the best decision I'd made all week. His name was
Björn, he was a world traveler but was currently traveling for business. The
gastropub didn't have any beers that he wanted, and after hearing my plight
regarding having no wifi, he invited me up to the lounge as his guest.

We made gin and tonics and told stories about our travels. Björn told me the
kind of stories that I want to have for myself and tell others. He had spent the
night with a random family in East Timor after getting there and realizing there
was not a hotel room to be found. He had gotten a tattoo from the first place he
found to commemorate landing in his 100th country. He always liked to travel
alone, because that's how you met cool people.

Maybe it was the stories, or his attitude, or the gin and tonic, but I was
feeling inspired. I checked the departures board, and unfortunately it had a
gate and a boarding time -- I had wanted to sit and talk with Björn forever, but
duty called.

I was finally on my flight to Vilnius! Happy days! The end was so near! I was
sitting beside a *large* man whose name was Vitas. He claimed to be from Sweden
and to just be going to Lithuania for a weekend out with the boys, but he also
spoke perfect Lithuanian and so I was skeptical. Also his name was Vitas. He was
*built* and took up the armrest and another inch of my seat without meaning to
or being able to do anything about it. It was an uncomfortable trip for both of
us.

The plane was on its final descent to the airport in Vilnius when suddenly it
swooped upwards and started accelerating. There was an ominous silence on-board.
What was happening? Several other people on the flight had also been rerouted
from Copenhagen, and so we were all pretty keen to get there.

"This is the captain speaking. It looks like we're having a slight malfunction
with our anti-skidding system. We're going to try to diagnose it in the air, and
make a few more attempts at landing."

We circled Vilnius for thirty minutes (I was definitely *not* going to make my
check-in time, and had forgotten to send the email to them due to being so
entranced by Björn's stories) and eventually the captain came back on the
intercom.

"Hi, flight-deck here. We're unable to land in Vilnius, so we're going to fly up
to Riga where there is a much longer runway. Don't worry, we'll take care of you
when we get there. More info when we have it."

As you can imagine, the mood on the plane was not stellar. Vitas began freaking
out, that he only had one night to rage and goddammit it would be tonight. Half
an hour we touched down in Riga, and the captain came back on to tell us that
the airline would be providing a bus for us to get to Vilnius. By bus, it's
about a four hour trip, which nobody was thrilled about. Many of us, myself
included, decided we'd take a hotel room and fly out the next morning. What
could go wrong?

We were unloaded into the terminal gate around 01:30, and rushed for the
transfer office to make arrangements. Well, we tried. We were intercepted by a
mean Latvian security guard with a big gun who didn't speak much English. He
stopped us, and refused to let us past or to tell us anything. Fifty of us
waited in the wing for about an hour before they let us out to the baggage
carousel, where we spent another hour waiting before our baggage arrived. Except
that mine didn't, and there was nobody working to complain to.  The rest of the
group was herded out of the arrivals area, and I decided to follow suit rather
than be left alone in Latvia.

Word of mouth carried the message around. "They've given up on the bus and are
going to give us hotel rooms and new flights tomorrow." Sounded great, but there
was only one guy there, and he seemed like more of a bewildered baggage guy than
a booking agent. The first flight to Vilnius was at 07:30, and given that it was
already almost 04:00, the hotel room bit seemed unlikely. It was; nobody got a
hotel room. Some adventurous guys, Vitas among them, decided to take a taxi the
four hours to Vilnius. I'm not sure what happened to them, but I hope they had a
great time raging.

As for myself, I spent the time wandering around and meeting people. Two others
on my flight also hadn't had their luggage show up, and so we commiserated and
formed a luggage-finding commission. We were unsuccessful. The luggage people
told us that it was Vilnius' problem, and that we'd have to go to the airport
there directly and ask. I suspect the information on a baggage tag is sufficient
to locate a piece of luggage anywhere in the world, but the Latvian officials
claimed it was not and furthermore that it was not their problem.

Welcome to customer service in the Baltics.

By 06:00, the situation hadn't improved. There were no hotels, but some people
had gotten emails telling them they had new flights. I was not one of those
people. Others had luck by attempting to use the check-in kiosk with their old
record locator. I was not one of them either. Instead, we waited until the
ticket agency opened, hoping to talk to a human who might have some amount of
empathy and be able to solve our problems.

Around 06:45, the ticket agency opened. Those of us who were en route to Vilnius
swarmed the office, ignoring any sort of social norms around queuing. I was one
of the last to make it to the front, where the woman told me I had been rebooked
onto the 14:00 flight to Vilnius. There was no way in hell I was going to spend
another six hours waiting in an airport, especially given the airline's
established inability to get me where I wanted to go.

During the long night, I had met a woman named Skaidre whose family was driving
from Vilnius to pick her up in Riga. I jokingly asked if she would drive me back
too, and to my eternal surprise, she said yes. Apparently this boy still got
some charm. Her family would be there in thirty minutes, so I had until then to
attempt to track down my bags. I spent it queuing and didn't actually get
anywhere, and so I returned to Skaidre so as to not miss my divine ride home.

Understandably, I was a little skeptical about driving across country borders
with the family of a gorgeous woman I had just met from a culture I didn't
understand.  But I had decided to spend my time in Vilnius always saying "yes."
Whenever a question comes up about "do I want to do X?" the answer is always
going to be "yes." It's a good way to get into adventures, doubly so when you're
new to a place and [don't yet have a big social circle][neighborhood].

[neighborhood]: /blog/neighborhoods/

As it turns out, I was a jerk to have ever assumed anything but the best
possible things about these people. I'm unsure whether to attribute it to having
met the nicest people in the country, or to Lithuanians being lovely people, but
Skaidre and her family were the best introduction to my new home I could have
asked for. They couldn't take me all the way to Vilnius, but they were going to
go out of their way to drive me to the bus station. They gave me money for the
bus, Skaidre gave me her scarf, and her dad was so concerned about my lack of a
coat (which was in my lost luggage, somewhere) that he took off his own sweater
and let me borrow it. At first I politely declined, but he insisted (across the
language barrier; he didn't speak any English.)

After a lovely few hours driving with them, they finally dropped me off at the
bus station. The weather was *significantly* colder than I thought, and I felt
foolish for ever having declined the scarf and sweater. Thanks Skaidre and dad!
I probably would have died had it not been for your kindness.

The bus station was in the middle of nowhere, and it didn't seem like the kind
of place they experienced many foreigners. As a result, I got a lot of stares.
With my neon, techno-colored hair, I kind of stand out. Lithuanian babushkas
aren't particularly polite at hiding their disdain. One woman literally stared
at me slack jawed for over four minutes. It was... uncomfortable, to say the
least. Thankfully the bus arrived, and I was left in peace.

After an hour or so, we arrived at the bus station. I was struck with an
overwhelming feeling of relief! Finally, after three days of travel, I was
finally in Vilnius, and furthermore, in a place I recognized. This was almost my
old stomping grounds! I navigated my way to the hostel without any hiccups,
feeling like I was *home*.

I was home at long last. After an extra 44 hours of travel, two countries I
hadn't meant to be in, \$28.94 in food vouchers for my inconvenience, the
hospitality of a lovely Lithuanian family, and a bus ride through the
countryside, I was finally home.

