---
layout: post
title: Moments of Strength
date: 2019-11-02 15:21
comments: true
tags: life, inspiration, strength
confidence: 2
---

> It is important in life not to be strong, but to feel strong.
>
> -Christopher McCandless


I'm writing this in the park, sitting in the first sun that Munich has seen in a
week. This wasn't my plan for today, which was to stay inside in a Haribo
induced stupor, watching Starcraft. You see, I've been traveling now for three
months, sleeping on strangers couches and doing nonstop programming. I'm
absolutely exhausted, and so my mini stay-cation in Munich has been less
productive than I'd like.

What I want to talk about today are moments of strength --- those rare times
when you're feeling slightly more powerful than usual. These are exceedingly
valuable events and should be sought out and capitalized on whenever they occur.
Using your moments of strength wisely in your most powerful tools for improving
your life.

The other day, in a moment of strength, I realized I was wasting too much of my
attention on watching useless YouTube videos And so, while I had the clarity and
ability to do so, [I blocked the entire website][reclaim]. Now in my moments of
weakness, I can't renege on this, and am forced to find more productive ways of
spending my time. I took advantage of my moment of strength, and fixed a glaring
problem in my life.

The idea is that most of the time, we are not very strong, and so we should take
these rare opportunities to change our lives so we don't *require* strength. And
the easiest time to do this is when you are feeling strong.

[reclaim]: /blog/reclaim-your-attention/

I have a friend who says she feels trapped in her life. We have spent a lot of
time together over the last few weeks, and while she certainly has real
problems, they don't seem nearly as insurmountable to me as to her. Over this
time, I've seen quite a few moments of strength in my friend, though
unfortunately I've seen most of them go squandered. Rather than taking the
opportunity to solve a problem, she will often bask in the feeling of strength.
This is not *bad* per se, but it is strategically shortsighted.

Moments of strength are great opportunities for bootstrapping oneself. The next
time you feel more capable than usual, even if only by a little, look at it as a
rare chance to fix a problem. And act immediately on it-it might not stick
around for long. That habit is what compelled me to grab my notebook, walk to
the park, and write this essay that I've been meaning to get to for months.

Capitalizing on moments of strength is a habit you build over time. The next
time you have one, use it to catalog the big problems in your life --- the things
getting in the of the life you want to live. Make an actual list, and make sure
it's easily accessible for the next time you have a moment of strength.

Circle any problems that are easy to tackle-things like making a phone call or
could otherwise be solved in an hour. Put a star next to the most important item
on your list. If, after making the list, you're still feeling motivated, pick
one and go solve it *right that second.* Don't think about it, don't give
yourself a chance to lose momentum. Just start moving. That second. Don't have a
shower first. Put on your coat and start moving out the door, or start dialing
the member, or whatever it is you need to actually do.

If you are tempted to get distracted, make a mental note to remove that sort of
distraction during your next moment of strength, and then, crucially, don't get
distracted.  Don't let yourself stop until you've made real progress towards
your goal.

I actually just left the park, as it was getting cold and the mosquitoes were
coming out in full force. As I got home, I noticed I was hungry, and that I had
quite a few interesting emails that could use some of my attention. But I know
from lots of past experience that if a blog post doesn't get finished in one
sitting, it never will be. And so here I am, ignoring my inbox and trying not to
think about how hungry I am, because I am temporarily feeling strong and that's
much more important.

Moments of strength beget other moments of strength in two ways. The first is
that, as you start solving problems in your life, they're no longer there to get
in the way of solving more problems. The second is that *you are actually
getting stronger,* which itself leads to having more moments of strength. After
you accomplish something you've been putting off, take a few minutes to sit and
appreciate the glorious feeling that comes with it. This is the greatest feeling
in all of life, better than any orgasm, meal or drug.

This feeling alone is enough to make life worth living. If you're not very
well acquainted with it, you are in for one hell of a ride. Treasure your
moments of strength, and they will reward you in turn.

