---
layout: post
title: How and Why to Become a Programmer
date: 2019-01-23 14:00
comments: true
tags: autodidacting, technical, programming
---

I find myself recommending programming as a career path to *lots and lots of
people.* It gets boring to write the same arguments over and over, so I thought
I should just do it once more: the definitive guide to why programming is a
great choice and how to break into it.


## Why?

Programming is fucking cushy.

*The money is really good.* Like, we're talking *really good.* If you're willing
to relocate, your first job will probably pay around \$105,000 USD in salary. In
addition, you're going to make stock options (worth maybe \$50,000 a year if
it's for a company that actually makes money---worth nothing otherwise.) Also,
lots of big companies will actually *pay you money* to sign their contract. It's
called a signing bonus, you get it on your first paycheck, and it's somewhere
between \$10,000 and \$80,000. The only catch is that you have to stay for a
year. After that, you're free to go somewhere else, get a 15% raise, and another
big signing bonus. Before tax, you're looking at about \$200,000 USD per year on
your first job, if you can land one of the good ones. If not, or if you're not
willing to move, let's say \$100,000.

*You don't need any qualifications.* Nobody in the industry cares whether or not
you went to university. They don't give a shit about what you look like or who
your family is; all they care about is whether or not you can reverse a linked
list in linear time[^1]---whether or not you can code. In other words, it's an
industry in which skills trump qualifications every time. The interviews rarely
have any "soft" questions; you're just asked to program a solution to a problem.
If you can do it and your solution doesn't suck and you don't seem like an
asshole, you get the job. Sometimes if your code is *really* good, they'll even
look the other way on the asshole bit.

[^1]: It's not nearly as difficult as it sounds.

*Everything you need is free.* There's this neat culture in programming circles
of people who make cool stuff and then give it away for free. That means *every
tool you need* is already made and is freely available. And if it isn't,
programming skills are the same ones you need in order to build the tools that
don't yet exist. See *working on real projects* later in this essay.

*It's a hot industry.* Seriously hot. There are simply not enough people good at
computers in the world. *Everyone* is hiring. I'm not kidding about that; *I get
roughly one job offer per week, sent to me by people I've never met before.* And
this number is low compared to lots of people in the industry---some people get
a few every day. How many times per year do you turn down six-figure jobs? In
addition, you don't need to worry about your job being automated-away---the
people doing the automating-away are programmers, and [some very fortunate
mathematics][godel] prove that when we can automate programming we must already
be able to automate everything else.

[godel]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems

*Programming is a creative endeavor.* Most of your time is spent thinking about
how to solve the problem; very little of it is *actually* solving it. Knowing
the problem is like 99% of the way there. That means you can work from
anywhere---in the park, in the shower, on the beach in Mexico. Seriously, I've
gotten paid to work from all of those locations. The people in charge don't
really know what you do; they just know that if they feed you energy drinks and
buy a foosball table for the office, somehow lots of money gets made. Unless you
work at a bank, your boss will recognize this and let you do your thing. So long
as you get your work done and make a halfhearted attempt to make it to meetings,
nobody cares what hours you hold.


## Why Not?

There are a few reasons you might not want to become a programmer.

*You* need to spend a lot of time on a computer.

*You feel like you won't be good at it.* In my experience, computer programming
skills overlap with a lot of over things. If your job consists of working with
lots of different tools and understanding when to use which, then programming is
going to be a good a fit. If your job consists of diagnosing why things are
broken, programming will be a very good fit. If your job consists of making
simple things and then assembling them into more complicated things, programming
will be a good fit.

*You need to spend a lot of time interacting with people who are lacking some
crucial social skills.* These people are not unpleasant by any means, just weird
as fuck. In time, you will become more like them than you are comfortable
admitting to yourself. It's OK.

*"Isn't tech just full of tech bros?"* No. See the above point.

*It can be hard to experience your accomplishments.* Unlike carpentry, when
you've finished a software project, there's usually nothing that you can point
at and say "yes, I made that." The construction exists only in the platonic
world of ideas. Relatedly:

*Nobody except other nerds will understand what the fuck you do.* Despite
hundreds of hours of talking with my mom about my interests, she's never going
to truly understand what it is that I do. And she *actually wants to know.* If
sharing understanding of your work with a wide group of people is something you
really care about, this might not be a good career path.


## Why Not "Why Not?"?

Is any of those "why nots" *really* worth \$200,000 a year to you?


## Getting in the Door

"Ok, great! I'm sold on this exciting career aspect, Sandy! But how can I make
it happen?" I can practically hear you shouting enthusiastically at me! Before
we get into the "how to learn this stuff" bit, I want to give you a little more
insight into the industry.

*The cards are stacked in your favor.* OK, get this. Every company I've ever
worked at has this thing called a "referral policy." The deal is, if someone who
works there hands your resume to the boss, and you end up getting hired, then
that person makes somewhere between \$5,000 and \$20,000. I think the idea is to
inspire people to recommend their friends, but they get the money regardless of
whether they know you or not.

That's right. People get paid if they can get you a job where they work.  This
means LinkedIn is your best friend. You can just search for people who work at
any particular company you want to work for, send them cold emails saying
"here's my resume, please refer me," and they will because these people are
smart and would like to make some easy extra money on top of their
already-exuberant salaries.

*But wait, there's more.* You remember how I said that you'll be getting a job
offer every week? Those things are sent by people called "recruiters" whose job
it is is to hire people. It turns out that *they too* get paid if they can find
you a job. Which means that if you're lazy, you can also just email random
recruiters you find on LinkedIn and tell them you're on the job market. *They
will literally do the job hunt for you.*


## Learning How to Program

All of this sounds too good to be true, doesn't it?

Unfortunately, all of the above information is only applicable if you know how
to program. Fortunately, while learning it is *hard,* you can do it in six
months if you're dedicated. Most people in this field are mostly self-taught.
You don't need to go to school or get a certificate or anything.

Seriously. Six months. No bullshitting. It'll be grueling, twelve-hour days, but
it's doable. That's like, what, \$5,000 worth of food and rent? **Go take out a
loan and quit your job and focus on this. It's probably the most important thing
you'll ever do.** Programming has a 100% employment rate. In six months you can
pay back that loan with your signing bonus and then take the rest of it to the
bank.

So how do you do it? You don't need a special computer---whatever you already
have will work, as long as it has a keyboard (no phones, sorry!). Go buy a copy
of [Cracking the Coding Interview][cci], and use that as a todo-list of things
you need to learn. This is a fantastic book that will prepare you for what sorts
of questions you can expect in a technical interview. If you can correctly
answer every exercise in the book in less than an hour, you are already more
qualified than the vast majority of people I've ever interviewed.

[cci]: http://www.crackingthecodinginterview.com

To clarify, the goal is *not* to memorize the solutions to the questions. That
won't work; interviewers can sniff that out a mile away. But if you can
genuinely work out the answer to all of those questions based only on what's
inside your head, *you know more than enough.* At that point you are *highly
employable.* Enjoy those six figures, baby!

So, with Cracking the Coding Interview as your guide, how do you actually *learn
this stuff?* Two fold: you ask lots of questions and you do projects. To ask
questions, a good place to start is at [/r/learnprogramming][learnprogramming].
A *really* good place to start is their FAQ question [Where Do I Get
Started][faq]. Everyone is really very friendly.

[learnprogramming]: https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/
[faq]: https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq#wiki_getting_started

But beware! There is a *very common* misstep here that bites beginners---the
communities that help beginners are often *too helpful,* and many a new
programmer will develop *learned helplessness.* Which is to say they'll
automatically ask for help whenever they see a new problem, without first giving
their best attempt to solve it. **Do not fall into this trap---you might never
get out.**

In order to do projects, pick something on the computer that *you wish existed*
or *something that does exist but you can immediately see how it could be
better.* Then dive in, and systematically work on bringing this idea to
fruition. The only way to learn how to program is by actually doing it and
bumping into reality. Having a real project in mind is a great way to
accidentally discover holes in your knowledge. Ask for help when you need it,
but give it a solid 30 minutes of *thinking really hard* first.

Additionally, having made real projects is great for your resume. It helps show
companies that you're *serious*, even if you don't have professional experience.

## Making a Great Resume

Keep in mind that nobody in this industry cares about anything. Except for
whether or not you can code and whether or not you can make them money.
Seriously. That's it. As a result, you want to tailor your resume with this in
mind. My rules on this are simple:

*Make the relevant information easy to find.* At the very top, list what
programming languages you know, and how well you know them. Chop out words if
they're not necessary. Short and sweet.

*If it's not impressive, take it off.* This includes both work experience and
bullet points. If your last job was a barista, nobody cares. Get rid of it.
Unless you were the shift manager and realized that the company practices were
terrible and you singlehandedly introduced a new system that saved ten thousand
dollars a year. It's OK if this makes your resume short; better to be short and
impressive than long and dull.

*Put things in context.* Programming people are an analytical bunch, so put in
numbers wherever you can. Make sure the numbers are *meaningful* to someone who
wasn't there. For example, saying you increased something's speed by 10 seconds
is meaningless; instead say you improved it by 95%. Rather than saying you lead
a project, say that you lead the team responsible for the company's most
important project. Only if it's true, of course. If you don't know how to put
things in context, go read [this book][measurement].

[measurement]: https://www.amazon.ca/How-Measure-Anything-Intangibles-Business/dp/1452654204


## Conclusion

So that's all I've got. If you're dissatisfied with your job or your money
situation, I can't think of a single reason why you shouldn't commit yourself to
this approach 100%. It will be hard and scary, but it will all be over in a few
months and you'll be laughing about the experience all the way to the bank.

If you have questions about any of this, or if you just need a pep-talk, feel
free to [email me](mailto: sandy@sandymaguire.me). I'd love to hear from you.

