---
layout: post
title: Teaching Badly
date: 2019-01-07 13:40
comments: true
tags: education, analysis, autodidacting
confidence: 3
---

I'd like to demonstrate three widespread flaws in education today, through
a few little narratives.

The first stems from an early gifted-ed teacher of mine; I had the naive view
that my teacher could provide insight on any problem I posed to him. And usually
this was the truth; he often could help.

But on matters of mathematics, he knew very little. Unfortunately, this did not
stop my teacher from providing advice on these topics, and he did so with his
usual degree of confidence. I'd take him at his word and resultantly spend many
hours barking up the wrong, impossible tree.

That's not to say that spinning your tires on a problem is necessarily a bad
thing, but it's frustrating when you've been lead by a trusted adviser that a
bad approach is in fact a good one.

This leads us to our first insight: *be knowledgeable in your topic, or at least
in your ignorance. If you are teaching, ensure you know what it is that you're
trying to teach.* This problem is particularly prevalent in North American
schooling, where teachers are often treated as being fungible---the typical
example is enlisting the gym teacher to teach science class.

Kids aren't stupid, and it quickly becomes evident that the person responsible
for teaching a subject knows as much about it as they do. I would suggest that
this teaches the wrong lesson; that it's OK to boldly not know what you're
talking about because you have vested authority.

The second flaw in education I've seen comes from a more topical experience. A
few months ago, I started taking piano lessons again. It was mostly an
accident---a piano teacher got in touch wondering if I could tutor her daughter
in computer science. We decided on a quid-pro-quo agreement where I'd trade CS
lessons for piano lessons.

The lessons started with an exceptionally high learning curve. My new teacher
had expectations about where I *should* be in terms of piano, and set her
lessons accordingly. Needless to say, these expectations of hers were
significantly above where I actually was in skill level.

Now, I'm not one to shy away from a challenge, so I duly gave it the old college
try. My teacher would give me a piece to sight read (play without having seen
before) that was in a key signature I wasn't familiar with, making sure I played
every note for the exact correct duration of time, while asking me to perform an
analysis of the chords as I went, and expecting me to notice repeating patterns
in the music.

Any one, or possibly even two of these tasks, would have been possible for me
given serious, concerted effort. But attempting to simultaneously juggle five
difficult tasks in real-time is not a recipe for success. I'd play the piece
attempting to focus on all of my goals, and inevitably drop one or two. My
teacher would immediately stop me and point out the mistake.

Frustrating, concentration-breaking, and *actively unhelpful.* If you're having
a hard time focusing on a single challenge, your performance isn't going to
improve by instead focusing on *two* challenges.

This is our second insight, and it's one of methodology---*focus on doing only
one thing at a time, and on doing it well.* Practice a skill until it becomes
instinctive, then---and only then---tackle the next piece of the overall
problem. In other words, decompose a hard problem into easier sub-problems and
conquer them individually.

My third example comes from an improv class I took a few months back. Despite
having taken about a year's worth of improv, I decided to sign up for the
beginner's class. This was a mistake on my part, but gave me a better context in
which to evaluate the teaching.

After each class, I'd conduct an informal little straw poll among the other
students---"how are you liking improv so far?"---that kind of thing. The
response was always lukewarm. "It doesn't really feel like we're learning
anything."

Somehow learning wasn't happening, despite us doing three hours of exercises per
week. The problem, I think, was that the instructor never impressed upon us
*why* we were doing the exercises. Exercises that are not themselves the
eventual end-goal are helpful insofar as they build related skills. However, if
you don't know what the exercise is trying to teach, it's hard to extract value
from it.

That's not to say it's impossible, per se, merely that it's an inefficient way
of learning. It feels like the equivalent of listening to foreign-language tapes
while you sleep, hoping that they'll sink in through osmosis. While this may or
may not be true, it's certainly less effective than saying "I reliably mess up
the subjunctive tense in French; I'm going to go practice that and pay attention
to it for a little while."

There is a related failure mode here, which I've often noticed from musicians.
They'll play something that I like and I'll ask "what did you just do?" And more
often than not, they won't know how to articulate it. "I was just screwing
around." It's not that they've *forgotten,* it's that they don't have the
*awareness* of why something works. It just does. They've learned it
instinctually through brute force, and subsequently lack the tools to analyze or
articulate it.

And so we make our way to the third insight---*exercises are most valuable when
you understand what they're trying to teach you.* To the instructor, it's
probably obvious what the goal is, but this is only through the lens of
hindsight bias. The beginner doesn't have enough knowledge to identify specific
sub-skills or, relatedly, their value.

The takeaway is obvious: if you're responsible for providing examples to
students, take a moment to *explicitly tell them what to focus on while doing
it.* Provide a high-level description of *why this is a valuable thing* and how
it relates to the bigger skill at large. And it should go without saying that if
you're only recommending an exercise because your teacher recommended it to you,
maybe you should take a moment before passing on that particular torch.

Not only does knowledge of the immediate goal help motivate the students, but it
helps train them in the more immediate skill of "how do I know if I'm doing this
thing well?" Fast feedback cycles are key to fast learning. It's hard enough
throwing a basketball into the hoop---imagine if you had to learn how to do it
while blind.

My claim is that these three points are crucial in the pursuit of good
education. Know what you're talking about, and if you don't, be clear about it.
Subdivide problems into easier ones, and ensure mastery of the essentials before
attempting to synthesize them together. Finally, provide guidance on what these
sub-skills are, how they relate to the bigger picture, and how to go about
learning them.

When put this way, my ideal educator is less of a grade-school teacher and more
of a mentor. Someone whose responsibility is to show you the right direction,
to keep you from going off into the weeds, and to suggest a training regimen to
help. In short, the mentor isn't responsible for your success, only for giving
you the best possible chance at it.

> I can only show you the door. You're the one that has to walk through it.
>
> Morpheus, The Matrix

