---
layout: post
title: Gatekept
date: 2019-04-19 01:10
comments: true
tags: phd, university, collaboration, elitism
confidence: 2
---

A few days ago I got rejected from a PhD program at Imperial College London ---
a program I was *invited to apply for by a member of their faculty who wanted to
supervise me.* The experience left a sour taste in my mouth.

The official reason for the rejection is that my undergraduate GPA is too low.
0.86% too low, in fact. Missed it by a hair!

In my eyes, I'm a pretty outstanding candidate. In the last two years I've
solved two [major][prospect] [problems][polysemy] in my field --- both of which
people frequently said I should stop wasting time on, because they fundamentally
couldn't be solved. I didn't work on the problems to publish them or for the
fame or anything; I was just annoyed that I couldn't do something that seemed so
obviously *possible.*

[prospect]: https://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/prospecting-free-monads/
[polysemy]: https://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/polysemy/

My [professional experience][resume] is characterized by doing extracurricular
tasks to solve technical debt that nobody else wanted to touch, and by *knocking
assigned tasks out of the park:* I single-handedly made Facebook \$60M in four
months while I was an intern, and I successfully tackled design work at Google
that people said I needed five years more experience in order to have any chance
at.

[resume]: https://sandymaguire.me/resume.html

The point is not to toot my own horn here, but merely to point out that I have a
proven track record of self-directed study, of hard work, of executing on what I
say I'm going to do, and of excelling at it.

But no. My average grade is 0.86% too low to qualify. Looking at *average*
grades strikes me as a particularly stupid strategy for assessing PhD work. PhDs
aren't supposed to be well-rounded; they're *experts in narrow fields.* Looking
at average grades equally weighs my 68% in a mandated, irrelevant-to-my-degree,
automatically-get-15%-for-putting-your-name-on-the-final class on "The Role of
Technology In Society" against my 92% in a voluntarily taken,
relevant-to-my-degree (and PhD topic) class on compilers --- widely regarded as
one of the hardest three classes in the most challenging technical university in
the country.

"The Role of Technology in Society" was clearly a waste of my time, so I did
only as much as I needed to in order to pass, and no more (I was actually aiming
for 51%, but that blasted extra 15% blindsided me). Compilers, on the other
hand, are a subject very close to my heart, and are something I'd like to
dedicate my life to thinking more about.

If your goal really is, as Imperial College London [claims][mission], "to
deliver world class research in engineering" --- then weighing "The Role of
Technology in Society" equally against actual technical topics is *profoundly
stupid.* If we take them at their word that my low marks are the problem[^1]
then this decision is *elitist gate-keeping* at its worst, rather than any
honest attempt at producing good research. It's a reactionary strategy to
willingly accept false-negatives in order to maintain its prestigious name,
rather than willingly accept false-positives and actually try to do more of what
built its name in the first place.

[mission]: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/strategy/developing-this-strategy/strategy2014/mission/

[^1]: As opposed to my being caught in the middle of some political game they're playing with my would-be advisor, for example.

I sound saltier than I actually am. Seven days ago I'd never even considered
applying to Imperial College London; so not being there in September is exactly
the same state of affairs that my life was already in. Their decision hasn't
dashed my plans or anything. Despite the fact that I'm apparently *not worthy*
of attending ICL, I'm pretty sure this is a bigger problem for them than me.

For my part, I'm just going to keep doing my own research. [To quote
Feynman][feynman]:

[feynman]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f61KMw5zVhg

> I'm appreciative for the work that I did, and for the people who appreciate
> it. And I notice that other physicists use my work. I don't need anything
> else. I don't see that it makes any point that somebody ... decides that this
> work is noble enough to receive a prize. I've already got the prize! The prize
> is the pleasure of finding the thing out. The kick is the discovery, the
> observation that other people use it. Those are the real things. The honors
> are unreal to me.
>
> When I became a member of the National Academy of Science I had ultimately
> to resign. Because there was another organization, most of whose time was
> spent in choosing who was "illustrious" to be allowed to join us in our
> organization... the whole thing was rotten.

Yeah, that sums up my feelings pretty well. Maybe it's sour grapes, but if
Imperial College London really and truly believes I'm not good enough for them,
well, good riddance! It's their loss, really!

In conclusion, I'd like to extend an open invitation. If you, like me, believe
that effect systems and free monads are what programming is going to look like
in 30 years, please get in touch. I'd love to talk with you. Regardless of your
academic or industrial affiliation, regardless of your skill level, and
*especially* regardless of your GPA. Get in touch.

Ideas like these are the ones that change the world, and I'm willing to dedicate
my life to it. If you are too, then why the hell aren't we already
collaborating?

