---
layout: post
title: "What Did I Learn in the 2010s?"
date: 2020-01-12 12:48
comments: true
tags: review
confidence: 2
---

Not only is it a new year --- and therefore a new me --- but it's also a *new
decade.* Having been born in 1990, new decades for the world roughly correspond
to new decades for me. I thought it would be interesting and nostalgic to look
back at the last ten years to see what I've learned.

The most important thing I learned in the last decade was **confidence.**
Interestingly, in my [earliest blog post](/blog/the-secret-of-happinesstm/), I
give the advice to "trust yourself. I mean, really trust yourself." Apparently I
thought I was already confident --- I wasn't. In particular, I learned to be
aware of [Dunning-Kruger](/blog/double-dipping/), and that [most problems are
effort-constrained](/blog/brilliance/). I learned that there is nothing magical
[separating me (or anyone else) from geniuses](/blog/no-miracle-people/). I
learned to [separate the person I am from the person I want to
be](/blog/a-lesson-learned/), and to focus on the latter. I learned about the
[importance of knowing the people around you](193.138.218.74), and of [having
good social support structures in place](/blog/home-is-where-your-people-are/).
Along those lines, I started being [very selective about the people I was
spending time with](193.138.218.74). I [learned about
dating](/blog/get-the-girl/), and how to be attractive, and how to make moves
--- it turns out people aren't mind readers, and if you don't tell them you're
interested, they don't know.

But in general, what I really learned here was to [stop being so *fucking
scared*](/blog/building-over-the-abyss/) of [everything all the
time](/blog/comfort-zones/). I learned to just go do things. Sometimes they'll
go poorly, but more often they'll go well. And if you're smart and trust in
yourself to be able to handle the failures, well, that's most of life right
there. I learned about [how I failed](/blog/shame/), and to [reflect on those
things](/blog/why-i-quit/), and to promise myself [to never do them
again](/blog/letter-to-myself/). One particular tactic that came out of this new
understanding is to [always say "yes" to thing.](/blog/new-city-guide/)

The second most important thing I learned over the last decade was **strategy.**
I learned to [build up momentum](/blog/affording-ascendancy/) in roughly the
right direction, even if I wasn't [entirely sure](/blog/one-night-stands/) where
I was [intending to land](/blog/showing-me-the-way/). I used this technique to
[systematically put together](/blog/book-mechanics/) an amazing CV, and arguably
[an even more impressive set of skills](/blog/become-a-programmer/). I learned
about the [notion of career capital](/blog/say-hi-to-lucy/), and [accumulated
enough of it](/blog/book-mechanics/) to turn it into a [successful
book](https://thinkingwithtypes.com). I learned about the value of publicly
[committing to doing something that sounds hard and
scary](/blog/book-mechanics/)[^1]. After some talks at work that went *very
badly,* I learned the importance of playing to your audience. Perhaps *most
importantly*, I learned that I need [very specific goals and
metrics](/blog/looking-back-on-2018/) if I want to have [successful
years](/blog/2013-in-review/).

[^1]: Which, as it happens, is why I'm writing this post today. I promised my
  friend Ciara that I would. Thanks Ciara!

The third most important thing I learned was how to get a sense of my **limits
and capabilities.** I learned that that feeling of "omg I am *already* working
at full capacity" is [usually wrong](/blog/nanowrimo-postmortem/), and that
[real burnout](/blog/burnout/) feels more like carrying physical weight. I
successfully [identified abstraction as being a worthwhile
tool](/blog/generalization-as-intelligence-amplification/) to [study in its own
regard](/blog/chunking-conceptual-legos/). I realized that Haskell is [the best
vessel for exercising those abstraction
muscles](https://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/archives/). I learned to put [my
money where my mouth is](/blog/first-20-recursive-bees/) and to always be
willing to bet on my beliefs. I further learned that this makes *everyone else*
very very uncomfortable. I learned how to focus my zen, and how to be
responsible for how I feel, and to not try and shirk it off onto other people. I
learned a lot about my [common](/blog/thrashing-wildly/) [failure
methods](/blog/too-smart/). I realized the importance of having [uninterrupted
attention](/blog/reclaim-your-attention/), and [threw my phone into a large body
of water](/blog/reflections-on-a-dumb-phone/) not once, but three times, during
the last decade.

Fourth on the list of big things I made progress on is my **sense of purpose.**
In the early days of the decade, I spent a [lot of
time](/blog/along-for-the-ride/) talking about [saving the
world](/blog/not-for-its-own-sake/) without knowing what that meant or what it
would look like. I think I have made some good progress on this, and to be
specific, I think that climate change and late-stage democracy are big problems
that could be solved by a few smart, technical people working evening weekends.
I intend to spend the next decade being one of those people. I learned to start
[taking responsibility](/blog/building-over-the-abyss/) for my failings, and
[for problems around me.](/blog/shame)[^2] I learned to [question
authority](/blog/authority-and-momentum/), and that [the people in
charge](/blog/where-uni-fails/) don't [know any better than I
do,](/blog/teaching-badly)

[^2]: In particular, my good friend Austin Dobrik has been a huge role model on
  this front. I've spent the last ten years constantly amazed at his bravery in
  calling out bad behavior and helping people in dire situations.

Finally, I made a lot of progress on my **lifestyle.** I learned that the
traditional Western path is [definitely not](/blog/perpetual-motion/) [for
me.](/blog/reaching-climbing/) I learned that I need [very
little](/blog/no-possessions/) to survive, and that realization has afforded me
the ability to [pack up and leave](/blog/skaidre/) whenever I [feel like
it.](/blog/best-place-to-live/) These days, my total worldly possessions weigh
about 7kg. I've learned how to travel, and how to put myself in uncomfortable
situations in which I need to YOLO my way out. Through lots of trial and error,
I learned [how to move to a new city](/blog/new-city-guide/).

In addition to all of this, I learned lots of *things.* After all, I spent five
years this decade in university, another five teaching myself Haskell, and one
year [actively doing
research](https://reasonablypolymorphic.com/tags/polysemy.html). As a
programmer, I'm several orders of magnitude better than I was ten years ago. I'm
also [ten times a better musician](/blog/play-lots-of-music/), much better at
speaking French, and infinitely better at skateboarding, improv, electronics
repair, building IKEA furniture, and miming in languages I don't understand.

<a href="/images/decade/world2020.png"><img src="/images/decade/world2020.png" alt="Everywhere I've been"
width="50%" height="50%"/></a>

All in all, it's been a great decade. I'm happy with how much progress I've
made, but it's clear that I need to get better faster if I want to tackle
everything on the bucket list.

Thanks for staying with me over the last decade. Let's strive, and collectively
make the 2020s our best decade yet.

