---
layout: post
title: "For Social Networks, Worse Is Better"
date: 2020-11-26 11:20
comments: true
tags: social networks, worse is better
confidence: 3
---

Some time ago, I deleted Facebook. Maybe it was for New Years? Maybe not ---
it turns out to not have been a very memorable affair. At the time, I had set up
an alternative messaging platform whose philosophy I agreed with, and gave my
contact information to the few people I actively stayed in contact with. For the
most part, it's been a smooth transition.

But something I've realized since then is that this strategy ignores the long
tail of friendship. It doesn't help me stay in touch with my coworkers from a
few jobs back, nor from old classmates, nor my downstairs neighbor when I was
22. I mean, it's not really a problem; these aren't people I need to contact
frequently. But I have a habit of reaching out to people whenever I think of
them; it's a nice way to reacquaint with cool people from the past.

Facebook is really good at these sorts of interactions. But Facebook isn't free.
It comes with the twenty thousand of some of the world's smartest engineers
trying working full-time to maximize the amount of time you spend on the
platform. Its clustering algorithms are good at aggressively polarizing people
and turning everyone into an extremist. Messenger and events are really the only
good parts of Facebook. And until recently, the fact that you could expect
everyone to have an account; although there's been a marked engagement exodus of
people under 50.

What Facebook is really good at is the network effect. But the rest of the
platform is such an overwhelmingly bad experience that it spoils the broth.
Somehow we'd all find ourselves scrolling through the newsfeed for the tenth
time that day, seeing no new content, but *desperately hoping* for something new
we could "like."

And besides. I don't really need instant messaging with my old colleague who now
lives in India. We probably are never awake at the same time. What I really need
from Facebook is a convenient way of contacting him.

Contrast all of this to LinkedIn. Maybe five years ago, LinkedIn was doing
absolutely everything in its power to copy the Facebook recipe for success. They
completely plagiarized the layout, although they were careful to make the blue
of their design slightly more blue. After all, you need to differentiate
yourself somehow! They stole the newsfeed, and added likes and reactions. But it
never really worked. The content on LinkedIn doesn't have the fake veneer of
"important life events from people you care about." It's just virtue signaling
about jobs and shit. I've *tried* to mindlessly scroll on LinkedIn, and I just
don't give a fuck.

Here's the catch. LinkedIn has the same network effects Facebook does. Everybody
is on LinkedIn --- probably more of the people in my real life than on Facebook
--- if for no other reason than people forget that they have a LinkedIn account
and so they don't delete it. Unless you're actively hunting for a job, nobody
checks LinkedIn more than once a month.

By virtue of being so terrible, I think LinkedIn might actually be the perfect
social network. We're all on it, but we don't engage with it. It's a reliable
place to find people I want to reconnect with. But by virtue of it being a
"reconnect," there is no need for immediacy in this. So I'll send a message to
someone on LinkedIn, and on average, they'll reply in about two weeks. Which
I'll see two weeks after that. There is enough bandwidth here to negotiate a
faster means of communication, but reconnecting with a school mate just doesn't
necessitate anything faster than pen pals.

And the (bad) network effect here is self-reinforcing. Because people take so
long to reply on LinkedIn, I have no incentive to check it often. Which makes me
take a long time to reply, and a) keeps the mean response tie high, and
therefore b) keeps LinkedIn a terrible platform. And because it's a terrible
platform in terms of experience, it's actually an excellent social media
network. It sounds paradoxical, but the thing I like about LinkedIn is how
non-addictive it is by virtue of being shitty.

Worse is better.

