---
layout: post
title: TV is the Mind Melter
date: 2021-09-06 14:53
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
confidence: 3
---

For the last three years, I've been tracking *everything* I do on the computer.
This is done for me automatically via a lovely program called [arbtt][arbtt],
which records every window you have open, every minute. By watching which window
is focused, and how the titles of the windows change, it's possible to get an
extremely good sense of what activity I was engaged in, at any moment in time,
since 2018.

[arbtt]: https://arbtt.nomeata.de/#what

The original impetus here was to track exactly how much work I was doing per
project. Having this sort of information around is wildly valuable in
determining where your time is going, and whether it's being put to good use.

Yesterday, on a whim, I decided to run a query against my last year of computer
time: how much YouTube did I watch? I was expecting some embarrassingly large
number, like maybe three or four days worth. To my intense dismay, the actual
number was *30 days.* The horror! Holy shit --- I was off by an *order of
magnitude!*

Not only is this a dreadful review on how good my internal sense of spending
time is, it's also a disgusting amount that I wasted last year. To put 30 days
into perspective, that's equivalent to 90 work days, or 9 biweekly pay-checks.
At my current rates, this six-figures worth of productive time down the drain.
Compared to my burn rates, that's equivalent to about half a decade of expenses!
Forget skipping the avocado toast, or sticking to a weekly budget, the amount of
time I spent watching TV completely dwarves every other cost in my life --- by
at least an order of magnitude.

What the fuck.

Time spent watching TV isn't even time I enjoyed. The majority of things I watch
are *other people playing video games* that are 10-20 years old. Sure, there are
the occasional math lecture in there, but actual *valuable* watching time is a
tiny fraction of my total TV time. This is time that I'm not learning anything,
that I'm not developing any skills, and that I'm not feeling better because of.

It wouldn't even be fair to call this "wasted" time. This is simply *killed*
time.

So, what to do about this shitty state of affairs? Life is too short to be
killed like this --- to be killed at all, really. The part of me that does
long-term planning ("system 2") --- as opposed to system 1, which is good at
following habits and seeking short-term gratification --- recognizes that TV is
a horrible addiction, one that should be purged with extreme prejudice.

The trick to breaking (psychological) addictions, is to convince system 1 that
it doesn't actually desire these things after all. But system 1 doesn't speak
the language of well-reasoned arguments! It only understands vague intuitions,
wishy-washy feelings, and Pavlovian conditioning. So the strategy here is to
communicate my system 2 distaste for TV via intuitions, feelings, and
conditioning.

Last year, I read [Allen Carr's Easy Way to Stop Smoking][stop-smoking]. It's an
excellent book, and I am not, nor have I ever been a smoker. My interesting in
reading it was exactly for building intuitions on how to break addictions, and
the book comes chocked full of lots of psychological tricks. The tricks are
exactly what we're looking for --- convincing means of influencing how system 1
feels. They're almost embarrassingly simple in how obvious they are --- but yet
they allegedly work anyway. And it's not hard to see why.

[stop-smoking]: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01EVMK0H0/

For example, Carr never calls tobacco "tobacco." Instead, he exclusively refers
to it as "the evil weed." He makes frequent analogies to how it chokes out the
natural, beautiful garden of your body. He reminds you just how disgusting
smoking is, by focusing on how much you hated it when you started, how it makes
you feel powerless to addiction, to all of the cold nights you've spent alone,
outside, exposed to the elements. How it makes food taste bland, and makes your
teeth yellow, and he points out just how disgusting the stuff is that you
produce from your smoker coughs.

It's important to consider all of these downsides simultaneously. Individually,
the cost of any one downside might be less than the pleasure one receives from
smoking, and system 1 is liable to make the equivalent of the following
comparisons:

* cost(feeling powerless) &lt; reward(smoking)
* cost(cold nights) &lt; reward(smoking)
* cost(bland food) &lt; reward(smoking)
* cost(yellow teeth) &lt; reward(smoking)
* cost(coughing) &lt; reward(smoking)

System 1 looks at these comparisons and thinks to itself, "hey, since each
comparison comes out in favor of smoking, I should continue smoking." But, it's
important to remember that system 1 is really bad at math, and it's cheated
during its bookkeeping here. It's incorrectly counted the reward from smoking
multiple times, which is like if were to say "well the cost of this new laptop
is &dollar;1 than my paycheck for the week, and the cost of these new speakers
are &dollar;20 less than my paycheck for the week, so I can afford to buy both."

The real comparison that system 1 should be doing is actually:

* cost(feeling powerless) + cost(cold nights) + cost(bland food) + cost(yellow
    teeth) + cost(coughing) ~ reward(smoking)

If each of those earlier (incorrect) comparisons were barely in favor of
smoking, then there is no way that the honest version will come out in the same
direction. None of these downsides is unknown to the smoker, but often system 1
accidentally fudges the numbers, and the addiction seems much more persuasive
than it actually is.

Of course, none of these techniques are smoking-specific. They are easily
co-opted into convincing system 1 of anything. Like how much it hates watching
TV for example --- or should I say, how much it hates watching the *mind melter.
While I sorta like having something to fill (read: kill) time when I'm feeling
low energy, I recognize that my lethargic states aren't *cured* by the mind
melter ---- in the long term, they're caused by it!

Furthermore, watching old video games is a pathetic and ineffective way to
attempt to recapture how I felt when I was young. It's infantilizing --- and no
better than those adult children who cheer for every new (and inevitably
terrible) Star Wars film.

Often I get pulled towards melting my mind when my wrists hurt --- preventing me
from working on valuable things. But my wrists are hurt by having bad
ergonomics, usually when I'm slouching to melt my mind!

I think of the disgust I feel every time someone tells me about the latest and
greatest show on Netflix that they binge-watched over the weekend. They
inevitably sound like stupid programs (who *could possibly* care about tiger
kings and octopus teachers???), and I silently judge these people. But I'm no
better if I'm instead binge watching some guy play Mario for hours at a time. In
fact, I might be worse, since Mario isn't even novel.

What the fuck is wrong with me? How in hell did I waste a month of my waking
life last year doing this shit?

All of these things sound harsh, and they probably are, but I can feel it
working already. But system 1 also responds well to imagery. Here's what should
come to mind whenever I think about melting my mind:

<center><img src="/images/tv.gif"></center>

This is an image from the fantastic music video for Blockhead's song *The Music
Scene.* I won't link you to it for obvious reasons; you know how to find it if
you want to.

So, I feel like I've successfully convinced system 1 that the mind melter sucks.
But, as [Nate Soares][soares] says:

[soares]: https://mindingourway.com/productivity-through-self-loyalty/

> A problem isn't solved until it's solved automatically, without need for attention or willpower.

In the spirit of this, I've also installed [StayFocusd][focus] to my browser,
and have marked the mind melter as a forbidden site. By default it gives me 10
minutes a day across all of my forbidden sites, which is helpful in that it will
let me scan videos for information, but isn't enough time to get hooked.
Furthermore, I've used [uBlock][ublock] to delete all of the recommendations on
the mind melting site, so that even if I slip up, it will be hard to [fail with
abandon][fail].

[focus]: https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/stayfocusd/laankejkbhbdhmipfmgcngdelahlfoji?hl=en
[ublock]: /blog/reclaim-your-attention/
[fail]: https://mindingourway.com/failing-with-abandon/

Even though I'm pretty sure my new mindset around mind melting will be
sufficient, it's nice to have a backup plan.

Finally, it's nice to have something to substitute this behavior with. If I'm
still feeling burned out and low energy, I'm going to just pick up my book
instead. It will scratch a similar itch, but at least I'll have to exert some
attention, and create some room for daydreaming.

