---
layout: post
title: What I Have Resolved To Do
date: 2022-01-09 17:50
comments: true
tags: goals
---

2022 is here, and I'm very determined to kick its ass. My best years have been
those which I came to with a specific, scary plan. I've had sloppy, weak plans
for a few years in a row, and the years turned out pretty sloppy and weak as a
result. NOT THIS YEAR, BABY.

One big issue I've had with the last two years is that I haven't had enough
to fill my (copious) time, and because of that I fell back on traditional (and
stupid) ways of killing time: scrolling dumb websites, watching TV and playing
video games. That's no way to be spending my golden years of retirement. If I'm
going to be wasting my time, I might as well be getting paid to do it. Instead,
the plan is to say "YES!"  to enough cool projects that I don't have time to
spare.

Before getting to the actual goals, I have a mantra for the year that I'd
like to focus on:

**Brook no excuses for suboptimality.** This is my mantra for the year.
Whatever I do, I will do it with gusto. This is not to say that every essay
needs to be ruthlessly edited, but it does mean that every essay must accomplish
my goal for it. It means I will go the two minutes out of my way to fold my
laundry, or to get rid of the unused, uncomfortable chair gathering dust in the
corner. It means actively working towards making everything in my life better.
I'm retired with infinite time and effectively infinite money; I have no excuses
for living a suboptimal life. And this mantra is to help me remember that.

My goals for the year, in no particular order:

In 2022, I am going to **read and engage with 52 papers on topics that I find
interesting.** The engagement part is critical --- it's easy enough to "read" a
paper but moving your eyes over it. However, the purpose here is to rapidly
inject ideas and methods into my head. Engagement here means I need to produce
some sort of artifact as a result of working through the paper: something that
proves I understand the ideas in it. I've already done
[one](https://reasonablypolymorphic.com/blog/adders-and-arrows/), which should
give you a sense of what it means to engage.

A common failure mode I see in myself is engaging in suboptimal behavior due to
a lack of easily-discovered knowledge. For example, I put off playing piano
pieces in Gb for like a decade because I didn't know what notes were in that
scale --- even though when I sat down to think it through, it took less than 2
minutes to do. Thus, be it resolved that I will **spend 2 hours a week this year
researching high-value topics.**

One of the things I have been consistently putting off is learning how to feel
good in my body. My body is a weak programmer body, and it gets hurt all the
time when I try to exercise. Getting hurt all the time really kills any sort of
fitness momentum I have. So this year I will **get fit, or at least get to a
point where I understand my body well enough to not get hurt when doing
fitness.**

This year, I am not going to go to bed until **my living and work spaces are
tidy.** This includes the kitchen.

I will **compose and publish 12 original songs** this year.

In 2022, I resolve to **not be a curmudgeon.** This means that when things annoy
me, I will calmly go and discuss the issue with the first parties. Whenever that
isn't an option, I will come up with some other pro-social solution to the
problem, possibly including just deciding to not be bothered by it.

Relatedly, this year I will **not attempt telekinesis.** Attempting telekinesis
is when you try to solve a problem by wishing really hard that it would go away.
Like, when someone is bothering you but doesn't realize it, and instead of
solving the problem you just sit there smoldering --- in essence, hoping that if
you concentrate hard enough you could make their head explode. Similar to above,
I will either go calmly attempt to solve the problem, or stop being bothered by
it.

During 2022, I will **publish 100k words**. They do not necessarily need to be
in text format.

My biggest takeaway from the Elon Musk book is that Elon is significantly more
willing than most people to invest in himself financially. I recognized that
fact when I read it, but didn't do anything with it. So this year, I'm going to
**spend $10,000 of my own money on my own projects.** Not only will this help my
projects, it will also help me burn my runway cash, which should get me off of
resting on my laurels.

Similarly, I am earmarking **another $5,000 for solving trivial problems in my
life.**  I don't like spending money on things, even when that money would pay
off in big dividends, and this is a current failure on my part.

On the community front, this year I will **reach out cold to one cool person a
week.** I figure that even if only 5% of them respond, that will be two new
excellent humans I'll have created new relationships with.

Something I did during 2018 that aggressively changed how I felt about my city
was to [actively meet people.][neighborhood] This was one of the best exercises
I've ever done, but I've fallen out of the habit and find myself pining for the
results. So in 2022, I will **meet two new people a day.**

[neighborhood]: /blog/neighborhoods/

Playing music with other people is one of my most cherished hobbies, and I
barely do any of it. By the end of the year, I will be a member of a musical
community in the same way I am a member of many programming communities. I
realize this is not a very SMART goal but I don't know how to make it into one
and it's very important to me regardless. Please get in touch if you have some
ideas!

I don't have enough good friends in my life. By the end of the year I will
**have five really good friends.** Musicians from the above goal are allowed to
count towards this. The SMARTer version of this goal is that I will **spend
quality time with three friends a week** on average this year.

---

Whew! What a lot of things to track. I'm fully aware that when I make goals, I
usually completely miss the ballpark on what I'll think of as important a few
months down the line. So instead of just weaseling out, this year I am allowed
to **cancel one of these goals**, and **adjust the parameters on another two.**
I hope to not need to do these things, but they're available if I need to.

