---
layout: post
title: "Sandy Maguire Escapes the Room: Lost in Space"
date: 2022-08-13 14:18
comments: true
tags: escape-room, review, lost-in-space
confidence: 4
---

For my birthday, Erin and I headed to a local (literally across the street)
escape-room in Vancouver called Exit Gastown, where we played [Lost in
Space](https://e-exit.ca/escape/games/lost-in-space-ecape-room/) with just the
two of us.

Online the difficulty is three stars, but I swear in person it was labeled as
four. It's always hard to get a sense of the actual difficulty between
companies, so we went in expecting to escape. We didn't. By the end of our 45
minutes, we were on the last clue --- figure out a lot of math for teleporter
coordinates --- but nowhere near solving it. Alas.

Erin and I are very new to the world of escape rooms. This was her second, and
my fifth, and neither of us came away very impressed with the puzzles. The
concept is pretty great, but the execution left a lot to be desired. Let me
explain.

LOST IN SPACE. You're on a space ship that has crash-landed. The lights are off,
so you need to get the power back on, and then find the teleporter room and
teleport home. Or something. The crash-landing stuff was (very) briefly
mentioned in the beginning dialog, and the only other clue to it is a window
painted onto the wall that looks cracked. OK fine, except that this is a
critical clue in teleporting away; you need not only decipher the coordinate
system, but you also need to remember where you are in the solar system. And if
you don't remember from the initial briefing, well, good luck!

A few other dings. I liked the idea that the lights are off, but you're given
only one flashlight, which means your group can't parallelize any solving. You
start the game with an "engineering" binder explaining all the subsystems, and
roughly how to go about accomplishing them. One of the things to do is to get
the ship's power system on emergency batteries, and then eventually running
again, but accomplishing neither of them turns the lights back on! They're just
off, for 45 minutes.

The better design here is that the lights come on to 10-20% brightness after you
get onto emergency power, and then turn on in full when the generators are
running again. It's an interesting gimmick that you need to get the power back
on, but it needs to be rewarded, rather than being an arbitrary key to ungate
progress.

Half way through, you do get a second flashlight. But the batteries were
(unintentionally) half-dead and died before the end of the game. I had to leave
the room to get new ones, which ate a few minutes out of our failed escape.

Most egregious, however, was the binder's engineering list of "spare parts."
There are three spare parts listed: a set of jumper cables, a spare battery, and
a wiring diagram. We found the jumper cables first, and five minutes later found
the spare battery. So we were primed to think about the spare parts as literal
objects that could be picked up. But then the wiring diagram doesn't fit the
pattern. It's drawn onto the wall behind the puzzle, and is presented as the
wiring itself.

The puzzle is that you need to shine a light into four holes in the right order.
We fucked around with it for a while, following the obvious route implied by the
wiring on the wall. At each step, the thing beeps at you. But if you hold your
light on a little too long (we're talking half a second or so), it beeps again,
and that is the system resetting itself. Our progress was hampered by this for
probably ten minutes before we asked for a hint --- we could neither find the
wiring diagram, nor could we brute force the puzzle. But there was no wiring
diagram, and our understanding of the thing was entirely correct, it's just that
the mechanism was incorrectly resetting our progress.

Very annoying.

I'll also ding the room for having several unintentional typos in the manual;
usually things like these are secret clues, or something to decipher. Nope, here
they're just someone not using spellcheck, which doesn't inspire a great deal of
confidence that the game designer is a person of care.

There were some things I liked about this room though; the system to get the
power back on was interesting. You need to find some jumper cables, put them
into the right place, and then identify that the battery is broken, and find a
better one that won't short out the circuit. I like puzzles that require
disparate pieces to be solved, rather than being one-key-one-lock deals.

Despite my complaints, I liked that the lights were off at the beginning. It was
thematically interesting, but overstayed its welcome.

Overall though, I wasn't very impressed with Lost in Space. Progress was
entirely linear, and at no point did were we required to use information we'd
learned somewhere else. Puzzles like these are frustrating: if you get stuck on
something, you're just stuck with no recourse. Oh well. This one is a nice case
study in how to not structure an escape room.

Two out of five stars.

