---
layout: post
title: "Another Year Goes By"
date: 2024-01-14 13:55
comments: true
tags: yearly review
confidence: 1
---

Some things, like getting a job, can be put off indefinitely. Others, like
paying taxes, cannot. Writing a yearly review turns out to be in this second
category; not only did I promise myself I'd have this post out in the first two
weeks of the year, I also promised my wife the same. And so here we are, on the
14th, which is about as late as possible as one might be able to pretend such a
thing is timely.

The theme of 2023 was to not have a theme of 2023, and to instead partition the
traditional yearly resolution into three semester-ly resolutions. In the wisdom
of my advancing age, I've realized that I can maintain focus for on multi-month
projects, but larger time-scales are hard. And often neurosis-inducing if I push
through anyway. More on that later.

My first theme, spanning January to April (inclusive), was to be a *man of
action.* At some point last year, I was inspired by my
[now-brother-in-law](https://www.instagram.com/loicbakes/), who zooms around and
just gets shit done. He's not a man to sit idle, and around this time last year
I felt like I could use a boost of not sitting idle. The goal was simple:
whenever an action was presented to me, I had to move on it. This is not the
sort of goal you can fail, but it does remind you to strive in the direction you
want. By the end of April, our house had no more maintenance tasks to do, and my
backlog of funny projects was empty. I even got around to paying my taxes. Much
more on THAT later.

The second theme, May to August, was to be a *man of discipline.* Not like, a
discipline daddy with a wardrobe of leather, mind you, merely, a man who does
what he says and who lives according to his principles. This one didn't go so
well, much in part to these being the same months immediately before my wedding,
which took up a lot of mental space.

The third theme, September to December, was to be a *man of learning.* Kind of.
I didn't actually write this down or tell anyone about it. I started grad school
in September and that was my focus for the remainder of the year, for better or
for worse.

---

To do things a little differently this year, let's quickly discuss the METRICS.
Last year I did 768 hours of productive, nose-to-the-grindstone work, which
doesn't include time spent thinking or reading about problems. 390 hours of
those were spent writing [Certainty by
Construction](https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction/), and another 120
hours making video games. I did 120 hours of gainful employment, and another 39
hours of marking assignments. For 47 hours, I thought about MUSIC. In 2023, I
made [1550 commits on Github](https://github.com/isovector).

Also last year, I read 34 books. Most of them were shit (average rating 3.3/5
stars), but there were a few bangers. Sandy's top book recommendations from 2023
are, in no particular order:

1. [*Denotational Semantics* by J. E. Stoy](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1404132.Denotational_Semantics)
2. [*Structures* by J. E. Gordon](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/245344.Structures)
3. [*L. A. Confidential* by James Ellroy](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/57727.L_A_Confidential)
4. [*An Introduction to Tonal Theory* by Peter Westergaard](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3922937-an-introduction-to-tonal-theory)
5. [*A Pattern Language* by Christoper Alexander](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/79766)

Rather notably, three of these books are on the topic of prescriptive utopia,
albeit from completely different lenses. *Denotational Semantics* is the direction
computer science should have gone, but didn't. *Tonal Theory* successfully makes
the argument that harmony is a cursed way to think about music, and really what
we should be considering is *counterpoint* instead. And *A Pattern Language* is
a delightful account of how amazing our civilization and cities could be if we
could be fucked to make it happen.

To the casual audience, I would strongly recommend *Structures,* *L. A.
Confidential* and *A Pattern Language.* Two will dramatically change how you
look at the city around you, and the third is just an excellent read.

On the topic of books, I wrote a new one this year. More on that later, but
while we're discussing metrics, I sold 433 books last year, which works out to
about $12,000. It's not an impressive amount of money, but it's not chump change
either, and (almost) pays the rent. If you've ever wondered whether you too
should write a book, these numbers are above the 90% percentile for
authors. The numbers are somewhat arbitrarily deflated, however, since this
doesn't count sales of my new book, which due to some weird math are already
sold but I don't see until February.

Last year was nothing to write home about, musically speaking. I didn't find any
new amazing bands, but I have really been enjoying [Fela
Kuti](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SucEIvh8pew) and [Jerry
Reed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFD34aUpeyM) lately. Very different
styles, but both excellent in their own way.

Also, I spent a LOT of time (and money) at parkour last year! I went for 86
classes, which works out to about 110 hours of running and jumping over stuff.
Pretty cool! I've finally gotten to a point where I'm not aggressively
embarrassed to do it in public, which helps make it a lot more fun in the real
world.

---

OK, with the administrata out of the way, let's get down to brass tacks.

Last year came into bloom at a New Years Party. As part of being a MAN OF
ACTION, I had decided it was finally time to get my corporate taxes sorted out.
I'd been putting them off for slightly longer than was wise. So what luck that I
should meet an accountant at the NYE party! We exchanged pleasantries and
details, and made a loose plan for him to help sort out my taxes. Great! My new
resolution was off to a resounding start!

If you haven't noticed yet, taxes make up a big chunk of the 2023 narrative.

A few hours later, we were ringing in the new year at a nondescript bar, around
an awkward table with a giant lamp shade glued into the middle. With the lamp
shade, we couldn't see across the table, and without the lamp shade, the lamp
was far too bright to see anything else. Dan-the-Engineer and I came up with a
brilliant plan of wrapping the light bulb with some random piece of fabric we
had on our persons. The waitress was NOT very pleased about our ingenuity, and
reamed us out for the fire hazard we had inadvertently created. Or would, have,
if the light bulb were not an LED. But she didn't know that, and she certainly
didn't care.

After one Amaro Montenegro too many, Erin and I said our goodbyes and made our
exit. The traditional new years hangover ensued, as did our new tradition (est.
2022) to nurse it with home-steamed dim sum.

Much of 2023 was spent fighting. It began by fighting with Skills Matter, the
organizers of Haskell Exchange, a conference where I had given an invited talk
in December 2022. It was not my first time talking at Haskell Exchange, and it
was not the first time they had tried to stiff me. After not being paid for
months and subsequently threatening to be much more public about how
disappointed I was about it, they I immediately put me in touch with their CEO.
He tried his best to give me the shake, but eventually I got my money. I think
they've gone bankrupt since, which doesn't dishearten me in the least.

Also in late 2022, I had switched banks, from one of the Big Five to a local
credit union. While I like them very much, they set me up with a USD account,
but were completely incapable of *receiving* USD from abroad---you know, the
currency that isn't available locally, the one explicitly on the name of the
account? Apparently nobody had ever wanted to do this before! Weird!! After
five very embarrassing emails to clients asking them to "please try again," and
an intimate phone-booth experience with my banker, I eventually came to the
conclusion that they simply couldn't help me. So I set up an account with Wise
and that has solved all of my banking issues.

But, it didn't solve all of my money issues. Because there was still the eldrich
horror that is the Canadian Revenue Agency.

It began, as many things do, with a phone call. On some day in early January, I
got a call from a man with a very thick African-sounding accent, asking whether
I was "Alexander Magooer."

Close enough, I thought. "Sure, what's up?"

"Hello, my name is Asazabad Mafusasteb. I am from the Canada Revenue Agency. Can
you confirm your identity by giving me your birthday and social insurance
number, please?"

The oldest phishing scam in the book. I hung up on him. Not today, buster. You
have to get up *pretty* early to pull one over on ol' Alexander Magooer.

But our man Asazabad called back a few days later, asking for the same
information. More politely than last time, I told him that I don't divulge
personal information to strangers over the phone. Thank you, and have a good
day.

Asazabad called back several times over the next few days. "Listen, Alexander, I
am from the CRA. My Please confirm your identity by giving me your birthday and
social insurance number." I continued to be obstinate. "If you really are from
the CRA, please give me your extension number, and I'll call you right back, and
then we can chat."

"Because of the pandemic, I am working from home. I do not have an extension."

Sure thing, Asazabad. I told him I'd be happy to confirm my identity with him as
soon as he could confirm his to me. He gave me his "agent ID" for the CRA,
claiming it was sufficient. I told him that even if this was a real ID number,
nothing about quoting it to me meant that it was *his* ID number.

I did a quick Google search for his phone number. It came up as a known scam
caller. I hung up again.

Asazabad continued to call me every few days. Over time, he grew more desperate.
"I am from collections. You owe us a lot of money. You can log into your CRA
account and see."

As it happens, I *couldn't* log in to my CRA account. As far as I knew, I didn't
have a CRA account. Although occasionally I received emails telling me I had a
new message in my CRA account. Those emails frustratingly never included the
text of the new messages. I'd tried half-heartedly a few times over the last few
years to log in and check out these mysterious messages, but it's not something
they make easy.

In order to log in to your CRA account, you need to provide your social
insurance number, your mailing address, and some random-each-time number from
some random-each-time year that you filed taxes. Sometimes I had the documents
they asked for, often I did not. Regardless of that, it never let me into the
system.

But that was OK, because as far as I looked at it, if the CRA really needed to
get in touch with me, they'd find a way to do it. It's not my responsibility to
figure out what's wrong with their stupid website.

Asazabad continued calling, and we kept coming to the same impasse. He couldn't
identify himself to me, and I wouldn't identify myself to him until he did.
Classic Mexican standoff. He kept insisting that I could just log into my CRA
account and see that collections did indeed want to speak with me.

In a moment of weakness, I momentarily considered the idea that Asazabad really
might be from the CRA. And, if that was the case, maybe he'd be incentivized to
help me log into my account. So I unwisely gave him my mailing address, thinking
that maybe the issue was that the CRA had the wrong address on file, and that
was why I could never log in. Big mistake.

On February 7th, I call the CRA for an unrelated reason (trying to pay taxes)
and spend 41 minutes on hold. Since I'm talking with them anyway, I ask about
getting into my online account. That's a different department, and they put me
on hold for another half hour before I get through to Tommy. Turns out they do
have the wrong address on file; they've got some address that I haven't lived at
since 2010; despite having filed taxes with correct addresses every year. They
manage to get my address updated, but tell me they have been mailing letters to
me at that address for a long time.

I ask Tommy if he can confirm whether Asazabad is a real agent of the CRA. He
transfers me. It takes another twenty minutes. Jimmy tells me he can't find any
record of Asazabad being a real agent, but, and I quote "that doesn't mean he
isn't." What the hell.

Even though my mailing address has been updated, I still can't log into the damn
website. It seems I've locked myself out of the account by failing to log in too
many times. You would think they wouldn't make it so hard to pay them taxes.

Asazabad thankfully has given up calling me. But on February 14th---Valentines
Day---I receive a letter in the mail alleging to be from the CRA. "You owe us
$20,000. Please pay us within 10 days, or we will begin seizing your assets."
The letter is dated February 5th. Uh oh. I'm pretty certain I don't owe them
anything. I'm an honest person who begrudgingly pays his taxes every year. I
haven't hidden any income or property or anything, and I've never done even a
little bit of fraud.

Rather than focusing on romantic things with my then-fiancee, I spend most of
Valentines day on hold with the CRA, trying to confirm whether or not any of
this is real, and whether or not my assets are about to be seized on the morrow.
Because I'm missing some returns that they want, I'm unable to adequately verify
myself to any agents, and so they bounce me around for a few hours. All I really
want to know is whether Asazabad is a scam artist or not, and nobody will give
me that information until I've given them the right numbers from the right tax
returns.

What the hell is this bureaucracy? [Has the planet gone mad?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IR7a8rPlAao)

Eventually I manage to get through to an actual person who seems to care. Edward
tells me that the CRA has been hiring aggressively as of late, and so most
people I talk to are completely green, know nothing, and play it entirely by the
book, refusing to see the humanity in anyone they speak to. His words vindicate
my experience.

Edward pulls up my file, and although he can't give me any information about it,
he does confirm that Asazabad is a real agent and is in fact trying to contact
me.

Oh.

Oh no.

Oh shit.

Maybe that $20,000 bill thing is real.

So I call Asazabad back, and say I'm ready to talk. I confirm my identity, and
he says "you owe us $20,000. Please pay us. You can pay us through your online
account."

I would say that the joke was on him, and that I still can't log into my online
account, but the joke it seems, is on me.

Of course, Asazabad can't tell me *why exactly* I owe the CRA $20,000. He
handwaves something about over-contributions to my Tax-Free Savings Account
(TFSA), but he doesn't know anything more than that. That information hasn't
been provided to him. He's just the collections guy, and he wants his money.

The TFSA thing seems suspicious. I had a TFSA briefly from 2009 to 2014, but
it was completely by the book, and I'd closed the account before I left Canada
in 2015. So what the hell was going on?

I called the bank branch in my small hometown where I had my TFSA. They were
sympathetic, and I asked them to pull up any records they might have on it. They
didn't have any. Turns out by law they're only allowed to keep those records for
7 years, which meant they had destroyed any relevant evidence that might be
helpful for me to sort this obvious mistake out.

The CRA, it seems, is not beholden to this law restricting their records of my
TFSA. Cool.

After a few more hours on hold, Edward manages to get me logged into my online
account. Or so he says. Foolishly, I hang up. It doesn't work. I call back. I
spend another hour on hold before Mandeep *actually* gets me into my online
account.

Sure enough, in my account there is a backlog of eight years worth of unread
messages. The interesting stuff happens in 2020, when my TFSA from a decade
earlier was reassessed, and determined to be illegally held. Therefore, any
money I had in that account accrued penalties for every month it was there. Add
that all up, round to the nearest ten thousand for interest penalties for the
three years they were unable to contact me because they were sending mail to my
childhood home, and you've got yourself one hell of an expensive bill.

The question of course is why did the CRA determine my TFSA to be held
illegally? Having spent the entirety of that penalty period dating a lawyer,
I've learned that the best case of action in cases like these is to go read the
law. And sure enough, I'm in the right. All Canadians who live in Canada are
eligible for a TFSA, with a total cap that increases every year you have it
open. I am in fact a Canadian, who was living in Canada, and I was well below
the cap. Therefore, my TFSA was not illegal, and the CRA is in the wrong.

But unfortunately the onus is on me to show that.

The notices of reassessment state that I have 90 days during which I can file a
dispute. A salient question is "90 days from *when?*" From when they issued the
document and sent it somewhere I haven't lived for over a decade? Or from when I
receive the notice? Knowing the government, it's probably the former.

On February 15th I call the CRA again, and after the usual hour-long wait, I
speak with Tammy. I explain the situation. She tells me that I never informed
the CRA that I left Canada in 2015. Then, when I came back to Canada from
Thailand in 2020 and filed my taxes, I said "yes" when asked if I had "moved to
Canada." Which was true; I was not living in Canada earlier that year, and was
when I filed my taxes. The idiot CRA however interprets this as asking "did you
*immigrate* to Canada?"

Even though I was born in Canada and had well-established financial ties in the
country for nearly 25 years that the CRA all knew about, it automatically
assumed my "immigration" to Canada meant that I was not a citizen, and
therefore, retroactively, that my old TFSA was illegal.

Tammy advised me to write a letter and send it by post to the "special tax
services unit" in the middle of nowhere Canada. I rattled off such a letter,
explaining the mistake, and swallowed my pride to grovel for forgiveness,
even though I didn't feel to be in the wrong. But pride is cheap when you've got
$20,000 on the line. I paid the exorbitant $60 fee to have my letter delivered
by courier to the specialty tax services unit, and figured that would be the end
of it.

That was not, in fact, the end of it.

I called Asazabad back, explaining the situation to him. He listened quietly and
then said "you owe us $20,000. Please pay through the online portal." Thinking
maybe that he'd had a brain aneurysm, I explained it all to him again. "That may
be," he said, "but I do not know whether your dispute will be successful, and in
the meantime, you owe us a lot of money." Asazabad patiently explained to me, as
if I were a child, that the best course of action would be for me to pay the CRA
$20,000. And if my dispute were successful, they would pay it back to me.

I'm sure the CRA is good for it, but $20,000 is a big chunk of change, and being
in the middle of the bureaucracy, it seems unlikely that I'd see that money
again any time soon. I told Asazabad I'd get back to him.

So I went back to the statute, which says that all taxpayers have a right to not
pay anything while their case is in dispute, except in cases of "jeopardy." I
called Asazabad back, stating I wouldn't be paying the money, and cited the
relevant paragraph to him. If the powers that be considered my account to be in
jeopardy, I told him to give me that in writing, and wouldn't consider the
matter further until then.

A week later, Asazabad calls me back, stating my cited clause doesn't apply,
because my dispute window closed way back in 2020. And so he wants his money.
But since I've been so cooperative, he's willing to cut me a deal. We can work
together to make a year-long repayment plan in monthly installments. I forget
about my resolve to not talk to him any further unless I get jeopardy in
writing. We make a payment plan.

I call the CRA to confirm that they received my letter. They did; and say it
will take 90 days to get everything resolved.

When the day to pay Asazabad part of the penalty comes, I instead pay my taxes.
It all goes to the same account, and if push comes to shove, I plan to make an
argument that part of that money is for taxes, and part of it is repayment on
the TFSA charges. My ruse works, because Asazabad doesn't call back.

The next month rolls around, with blessedly little contact from the CRA. I'd
like to keep it that way, and since I paid my taxes in full, I can't play the
same trick again this time. Instead, I actually send real money as part of the
payment plan. Asazabad thankfully continues to not be in touch.

Keep in mind that this is all happening while I'm fighting with the bank to
receive money, and with Skills Matter to get reimbursed for my travel costs,
*and* with my accountant (more on that soon!) Despite having a lot of money, it
all seems to have dried up, and it turns out that old adage is true---it's
*much* easier to be carefree and fancy free when you can bankroll it.

Finally, 90 days from the date I sent my letter to the CRA comes around. I don't
hear anything. I call them back. I spend an hour and a half on hold. Kamal can't
help me. He forwards me to Jimmy (from all those months ago!), who makes me go
through the security questions AGAIN. Jimmy says he also can't help me, but he's
put a tag on my file to help speed things up. Maybe I'll get a call in the next
3 business days.

I don't.

Nine more calls to the CRA over the next few weeks. At one point, after two
hours of being on hold, I was greeted with the message "All our agents are busy
and the queue is now full, so we are disconnecting you. Have a nice day."
Finally I get in touch with Jordan who is the first human I have encountered at
the CRA in these six long months. Jordan immediately sees that the whole
situation is a mistake, apologizes on behalf of the CRA, and says he will
personally sort it out.

AND HE DOES!

It takes two hours on the phone, but finally the thing is done. Two weeks later,
I get a flurry of emails from the CRA, telling me to sign into my account (which
I somehow get locked out of again, and need to reset via, you guessed it, the
phone system.) But, all is well, the flurry is to tell me that they have
reassessed everything, and now it's they who owe ME $1000.

They still haven't paid it to me. Or the other $2500 they said they would cut me
a check for. But at this point, I'm too tired to fight about it. All in all, the
ordeal took 171 days from first being told about the problem to it being sorted
out. None of which was delay on my part. Only stress. A great deal of stress.

Did I mention throughout any of this story that I did eventually line up an
accountant? That guy from New Years came through, who put me in touch with one
of his friends, who told me that I shouldn't corporation because I don't have
enough money. He did his part to help by charging me a huge bill for this
information, ensuring I had even less money. His bill ended up being the same
amount as my taxes were for the year, which is a double scam because it's the
same number that TurboTax told me to pay.

Stupidly, the accountant and I never discussed fees. When he eventually sent me
his bill, his hourly wage was *above* what the internet claimed a very expensive
accountant cost. I grumbled, but paid it.

But this is not the end of his malevolence presence on my year. Not by a long
shot.

Sometime in the middle of the CRA saga, I made another stupid decision. I asked
my accountant if he could help get everything sorted out. He estimated it would
cost about $10,000 to fix. He didn't manage to fix it, but instead charged me
$8,000 and fucked things up worse by providing the CRA with a bunch of
*incorrect information.* Which is how I got locked out of my account again.

Worse, when he was filing my corporate taxes, he registered me as a GST
taxpayer, because I sell books, and had made enough to turn that a thing the
government cares about. GST is *fucking stupid.* I don't handle the books, I've
got a Canadian storefront who handles that sort of thing on my behalf. They
collect and remit GST to the government. But idiot accountant man figured that
should be *me* who sent the GST to the government. So he registered me to
"voluntarily" send GST to the government. While I wasn't on their radar before,
now I was, and they wanted their blood money.

The idea behind GST remittance is some sort of mickey mouse daisy chain thing.
The storefront collects it from the customer, and then they pay it to me, and
then I pay it to the government. If the supply chain is longer than this, then
everybody hands it to the next guy. I told my accountant this is a cockamamie
idea, since the storefront is already giving the tax to the government. But no,
he insisted, and signed me up for the program.

All is well and dandy in principle here, until you try to get the GST from the
storefront. In *their* accounting, they're already handling the tax on my
behalf, and so they sure as hell aren't going to just send me more $$$ because I
claim I will give it to the government instead. But since I have "voluntarily"
registered as a GST payer, the government is now insisting that I pay them.

The end result is that my books are being double taxed, with the goods and
services tax coming directly out of my pocket. It seems like they just let
*anyone* be an accountant.

I suppose the life lesson to be learned from all of this is to not trust some
guy you met at a New Years Eve party with your livelihood. You can pay someone
to do a job (and how!), but you can't pay them to give a shit. Funny, I ended up
saying that last year too...

Sorry. I've had this story pent up for a full year, and apparently just couldn't
stop myself once the ball got rolling. A lot of really excellent things did
happen this year, even though I've now spent nearly 5000 words complaining.

Anyway, the year began by spending a week and a half with Andrew, working our
way through Ludum Dare 52---a semiregular weekend game jam. We hung out and
spent 36 hours making [Where's My Chicken,
Man?](https://github.com/isovector/ld52) which happened to be a surprise
platformer hit. Andrew and I put on the [Kraak and
Smaak](https://open.spotify.com/track/0d1ZKNMQgiEntJFkgbY526?si=571dd2c3aa114dac)
and hacked away deep through the nights. I did the programming and Andrew did
the character and level design. All in all, it was a total blast, and a few
people spent a few months speedrunning it. What the hell kind of world do we
live in?

