---
layout: post
title: 2020
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
confidence: 1
---

## Southeast Asia

What a weird year 2020 has been. It started in Bangkok, having gone all the way
down to the busiest place I've ever been in my entire life to see some
fireworks. And then, when we got there 10 minutes before the fireworks, we
somehow decided to not go watch them. Whoops.

After one of the most amazing jazz concerts of my life to see Tran Manh Tuan,
Natalia and I then headed to Saigon, where we spent a week bickering and went on
a truly awful walking tour of the city. N said she hated cities, so we took a 19
hour train ride into the rural middle of Vietnam. And promptly promptly broke up
when we got there. Somehow she convinced me to pay for her flight out of the
country. As far as getting rid of exes, \$60 isn't such a bad deal, but I think
she got the better end of it.

So I trundled back to Koh Lanta, the first place since Denver to felt like home.
I was there for about two months, having found a villa apartment, and hanging
out at the [Hub of Joys][hub] --- an amazing hostel on the island.  I'd chosen
the apartment (furnished!) because it came with a kitchen and I was feeling
optimistic about cooking, despite not knowing how, not having a grocery store,
and living in a country where a restaurant meal will set you back less \$1. The
extremely sassy manager of the apartments gave me a tour of the place, and it
was exactly what I wanted.

[hub]: https://www.hostelworld.com/hosteldetails.php/Hub-of-Joys/Koh-Lanta/273529

My evenings were spent at the Hub, schmoozing with new people on the daily. For
whatever reason, the Hub mainly attracts young, single, German women, so between
that and nightly karaoke, I was pretty occupied. The day I was supposed to take
possession of my apartment, I'd convinced one such German woman to come check it
out with me. When we got there, it wasn't at all the place the sassy manager had
shown me! Instead of a glorious king-sized bed with an ocean view, I was instead
saddled with five(!) single beds. The German woman wasn't impressed, and went
home.

After complaining to the sassy manager, two Thai men came *running* up the
hill carrying a giant mattress. I think it might have been a show to make me
feel bad, but knowing that didn't make it feel less bad. While we waited for the
staff to make a new bedroom right before my eyes. It happened impressively fast,
but it was still slow as hell. The sassy manager hung out the whole time, and
asked me to play a song on the guitar for her. I sang the first thing that came
to mind, and she said "oh, a love song? no thanks" --- it wasn't --- and we
spent the rest of the time in uncomfortable silence.

My neighbors eventually came around to say hi. They were grandparents from
Sweden, and were very suspicious of this young man who had come to live in their
community. They'd somehow heard about the fuss I made about having a kitchen,
and would regularly check up on me to see if I'd been using it.

In the mornings, I'd work on writing [my book.][add]
The afternoons were spent swimming, lounging around on the beach, and playing
guitar. And in the evening, back to the Hub to hone my social skills and
inevitably try to persuade Germans to come to karaoke. It didn't often work, but
when it did, great nights always followed.

[add]: https://algebradriven.design/

What a life of luxury I led.

After a few weeks of this, it came to my attention that I was *happy.* Ask
anyone; that's not a feeling I'm particularly familiar with. That's not to say
I'm depressed or sad or anything. My life is excellent, but I'd never really
*felt* it before, viscerally. Partly it was just unwinding; after [living on
couches for four months][erdos] and [breaking down][breakdown], I really needed
some "me" time. But also, for the first time in my life, I noticed how good I
had become, socially.

[erdos]:
[breakdown]:

For the vast majority of my life, I'd been a shy kid, who wasn't particularly
good at talking to new people, or dealing with social situations. I'd turned to
alcohol as a crutch when I hit 19, but ten years later was now sober and, I
realized, completely in control of social encounters. I could organize groups,
change the energy level of the room, and get shy people engaged and opened-up. I
could reliably get into deep, interesting conversations with people. And,
amazingly to 16-year-old me, had women throwing themselves at me.

Somehow, I'd gotten really good at social situations, and hadn't noticed it
until early February. I think until then, I had been carrying around the memory
of *the person I used to be,* while thinking it still applied. Shedding that
false identity is the most powerful experience I've ever had. Funny that I
needed to run to the other side of the world and play guitar and flirt with
German girls in order to make that happen --- it's not exactly the hero's
journey.

Of the many incredible people I met and spent tie with, some exceptional ones
were Liam, Tobi, Lucie and Katha --- with whom I put more trust than I was
comfortable, and was richly rewarded in the resulting interactions. I love you
all, for our discussions about overthrowing governments, for our impromptu trip
to Krabi Town, for using my head as a jenga platform, and just for your
intellectual and emotional companionship.

In February, my old friend and occasional lover Erin came to visit. There are no
words to describe the joy I experienced as she walked across the hotel lobby to
come say hi. The next ten days were a flurry of terrible tourist islands,
non-air-conditioned bungalows, witnessing a child bride be married off,
never-ending intellectual discussions. Oh, and I kicked a sea urchin at some
point, so also hobbling around and spending hours soaking my toes in vinegar
held in an empty cup-noodles container.

After too many days on Koh Lipe, we decided to leave, and I brought Erin back to
Koh Lanta. We got some excellent khao soi, some iffy sushi, and the karaoke
performance of a lifetime. I introduced her to my Thai hostel family. Tong and
Noisy knew there was something special about the way Erin and I felt about each
other, and they presented us with chop sticks on our final goodbye ---
apparently a Thai wedding tradition. Portent.

Erin sugared us with fancy hotel rooms when we went to Phuket, but was unable to
deal with it due to getting probably-covid. We're not sure what it was exactly,
but she was out of commission for a few days and we were both genuinely ---
though momentarily --- concerned she might die. But she didn't! And instead we
shared a cab to the airport, where she headed back to Canada, and I made my way
to Chiang Mai.

Chiang Mai was where my previous transformation happened, back in 2017, when I
decided to [quit my job and retire.][retire] Unfortunately, I came to the
conclusion that it was the circumstances (and more importantly, the people) who
made Chiang Mai magical the last time around. Without Sam, Job and Dan, the
place just wasn't the same. My week in Chiang Mai was lonely, but I did make
some geo-tagging stickers of my face that I distributed to the random travelers
I met. To date, they've been scanned in 18 different cities across the globe,
and I still have like 500 in my closet to put up when the world reopens.

[retire]:

My Thai visa was about to expire, so my plan was to head to Korea and then to
Japan. But COVID struck in full force, and both countries were closed to me. Due
to lots of unsolicited advice from back home, I was convinced to return to
Canada, but still had a week to kill. I spent it in a quiet hostel in Bangkok on
Erin's recommendation where I met some cute Thai nurses whom I liked ("you are
very strong and handsome boy"), and a tech-bro-startup-dude that I didn't. That
week I made some incredible breakthroughs on my book, eventually stumbling
across the eventual linchpin of the final product.

While I was there, I discovered a love for Japanese curry, and also discovered
my first real security vulnerability in the website for Japanese curry. Mark one
of my yearly goals off!

I ran into my ex-girlfriend Dana in Bangkok, who had been traveling continuously
since we'd broken up (on good terms) in 2017. It was great to see her, and we
had a few fun days bopping around the city and catching up. I was headed for the
Canadian winter in two days, and she helped me put together a last-minute,
weather-appropriate outfit for it.


## Getting Settled

March 9th, and I whooshed back to Canada. I got into the country a few hours
before they started telling people to self-quarantine at the border, so I get
off scot free. The next few days were spent with my friend Andrew, who was kind
enough to host a potentially deadly human on his couch. That night we got a few
of the lads together and witnessed the genesis of the spectacular
&infin;-groupoid chat. I was [en-route for Victoria][best-place] During my stay,
I convinced Andrew to move to Victoria with me, and we hit the island.

[best-place]:

Victoria. My new home. But I didn't yet have a place to live, so I hit the only
hostel in town that was still open --- the unfortunately named Hostelling
Internation Victoria. And my god did HIV live up to its name. Without a doubt,
it was the worst hostel I've ever stayed at. My dorm was full of 40 men, with
the exact smell you'd expect from a dorm full of 40 semi-homeless men. There
were bed-bugs, no community vibe whatsoever, and it was cold as shit. I was
supposed to stay 14 days but only managed two; it was the man snoring at a
record 78dB --- louder than a vacuum cleaner. I know, because I measured it.

Instead I found a room in a shared airbnb apartment, run by some chill people.
It would have been fine, but they smoked a loooot of weed, which I find
exceptionally distracting. Although they didn't say anything, I could tell they
were uncomfortable having me there during the days of our GLOBAL PANDEMIC. It
was nice base of operations while I recovered from the HIV, but it was time to
move on and find a place of my own. Before I took off, my hosts set me up on a
blind date because, and I quote, "you both like candy." Needless to say, the
date didn't go well, nor was it helped by her grandfather dying earlier in the
day.

I'd bought a skateboard since moving to Victoria, and the early days of the
lockdown were amazing. There were no cars on the road, so I moved house by
skating down the middle of the street, tugging my roller suitcase behind me.
Sandy "King of the Road" Maguire.

What followed was an endless procession of airbnbs. There was a weird executive
suite. A loft apartment with bad sound-proofing where all of the neighbors would
complain if you had the audacity to go up to your loft. The very Chinese
apartment, owned by a white man and his latina wife. I stayed at the last of
these for a month, and used the opportunity to buy a piano as something to help
keep me sane. I played an hour-long concert on my balcony, to the thunderous
applause of three homeless people and one racist man.

Erin coincidentally lives in Victoria --- so we started hanging out. Our history
has been a long, twisted one, going back seven years. In all that time, we'd
been interested in one another, but never simultaneously single and co-located.
Possibly aided by the GLOBAL PANDEMIC, we ended up spending a lot of time
together and, despite our best efforts, couldn't manage to stay apart.

I finally found an apartment --- unfurnished --- at a bit of a steal; the
landlord clearly couldn't afford the mortgage, so I picked it up at well below
rental prices. The neighborhood seemed really nice, lots of food options, a
grocery store, a jazz bar, but everything was closed due to the GLOBAL PANDEMIC.
Erin helped me move my one suitcase and piano across town on foot, and we spent
a romantic evening on the floor of my empty apartment, eating burgers and
singlehandedly keeping the Canadian potato farmers in business.

With an apartment lined up, all that was left were the necessities of modern
living: furniture, a bed, wifi and a phone so I could buzz people into the
building. Furniture was surprisingly easy; IKEA just dropped it off and I spent
a few days pounding dowels, twirling Allen keys, and watching Jackie Chan
movies.  But the other three? *Very challenging.*

All of the mattress stores were closed, which meant I was resigned to the
dreaded bed-in-a-box internet shopping experience. After what felt like 10 hours
of doing MATTRESS-RELATED RESEARCH, learning about what sort of sleeper I was,
and where my sleep pressure points were, and what sort of hardness sleepers like
me should, and what my pillow shams said about me as a person, I was ready to
*do shopping.* I splurged and bought the best bed for me according to the
internet. But supply chains were backed up, so it got lost in the mail. And then
they kept trying to deliver it at 8 in the morning, but because of the
combination of *not having a phone to buzz them in* (a forthcoming story in this
saga) and *not sleeping at the apartment because I didn't have a bed there,*
they failed to deliver it for an additional four days. Let me tell you, after
two weeks of sleeping on floors and couches, nothing has ever felt better than
taking that damn mattress of it its box. Not even the realization that my
research was for naught and it was ridiculously uncomfortable could sully my
spirits.

Throughout all of this time, I didn't even have internet to help. I'd called the
internet people well in advance, but you know how they are. They can never show
for a week. When the guy did, he hooked up some cables in the control room, and
told me to go plug in the modem and see if it worked. Unfortunately the modem
hadn't yet arrived in the mail, so he left, assuming it would just work. The
delivery company tried to deliver the modem, but *because my phone didn't work*
(still forthcoming,) they decided that instead of leaving it, they should drive
it 100km away and leave a note telling me to pick it up at my earliest
convenience. There was no "we will attempt redelivery" info, nor was there a
website, nor did they actually say where they were holding my package. They
didn't pick up the phone for 45 minutes when I called on a borrowed phone.

Thankfully the telco *did* pick up the phone, and I berated them until someone
bit the bullet and waited on hold for two hours to get in touch with the
delivery company.  When my modem finally arrived, it didn't just work.
Apparently my apartment wasn't in fact wired for ADSL, but the modem didn't come
with a cable, so I had to run across town to pick one up before I could learn
that. Tech support then refused to help me until I tried a different cable, so I
had to go back across town to get *another* cable. It also didn't work. The
telco said they could send a guy in a week, but he'd probably have to cut holes
in the wall to install it. Yeah right, pull the other one. It has bells on it.

So I called around, and finally found a cable reseller in town. Their office was
a five minute walk away, but due to the GLOBAL PANDEMIC, I wasn't allowed to go
pick up a modem from them. Instead they'd have to mail one. Another week of
waiting, and, guess what! It's a lemon! For christ's sake. Two excruciating
hours on the phone with tech support where they ask me if I was *sure* that I'd
turned it on. And that I'd plugged it in. Oh, and are you POSITIVE that it's
turned on? Maybe try wiggling the cable. Eventually I convinced them to send
another modem. Thankfully there were no delivery issues this time, and it worked
the first time I plugged it in.

And during this whole ordeal, I was trying to get a cheap cellphone, just
something that the front door of my building could call to get buzzed in. But
all of the phone companies were closed due to the GLOBAL PANDEMIC. "Did you know
that most problems can be solved at our website?" Not this one, and even if it
were, not without internet, you bastards. Eventually they opened up in person,
so I biked across town to wait outside for an hour while they allowed *one
person maximum* into the store. I convinced them no thank you, I wouldn't like
the latest iphone. Yes, that's right, a \$10 plan is sufficient. No, I don't
need data with that. The man looked dejected, but took my credit card, and sent
me on my way. Blissfully, the phone worked without any issues.

I caved temporarily on the data front while I sat in my unfurnished, unconnected
apartment, with the rest of the world closed, while I waited for all of the
problems in my life to get ironed out. But I couldn't add the data plan, because
they couldn't charge my credit card. This was mysterious; the card was fine. I
had used it to buy the phone originally, it wasn't blocked, and I could still
use it to make purchases elsewhere. It turns out the telco doesn't know the
difference between billing and mailing addresses, and *always assume* that those
are the same thing. But my billing address was still in America, and for
whatever idiotic reason, their online system wouldn't let you fill in an
American postal code. So, they could accept my money in person, but the online
system couldn't handle it. After an hour talking to escalating tiers of
managers, the eventual suggestion was to "change my billing address." Thanks so
much, guys. I don't think this one ever got sorted out.

I'm sure the system works really well when you're all set up, but MY GOD things
shouldn't have been this hard.


##

In late April(?), Erin and I decided to "go steady." We were already
inseparable, but this made it official. Out of all the marvelous things that
happened in 2020, this event tops the charts.

Now that I was back in Canada, I decided to go visit my parents, who lived only
a breezy eight hours' drive away. It sounds crazy, but that's pretty damn
proximate for Canada. I rented a car, and went up for a week. It was great to
see them, but I left as a firm believer that familial relationships are much
better with some distance. While I was there, I spent a few hours cutting and
sanding styrofoam that I eventually [turned into homemade speakers.][speakers]

[speakers]:





