---
layout: post
title: 2025
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
confidence: 4
---

Another year, another yearly blog post. Jeez, it seems like the only thing
I actually do with this website these days. I haven't actually written anything
here that WASN'T a yearly blog post since 2022. Yeesh. Anyway, that's enough
self flagellation. We're here, we're live, and for one night only, we're going
the full monty.

The year rolled over with Erin and me out on a walk, somewhere around the
Bloedel conservatory, discussing The Future. Our new year's plans had been
cancelled last minute, and rather than go to the Mirror Ball (whatever that is)
on our own, we decided to cut our losses and go enjoy the neighborhood. We
discussed what we wanted out of the year, agreeing that we wanted to have bought
a house, gotten pregnant, and sorted out our careers. Not your every-year sort
of resolutions, but pretty solid all things considered.

We had spent most of 2024 on The House Hunt, looking at terrible apartment after
terrible apartment. Seven hundred square feet for a million dollars, with
a hundred thousand dollars of special levies scheduled for the next thee years.
No thank you. But after you've seen a few dozen of these things, your vision
gets a little warped and you start thinking that *maybe it wouldn't be so bad.*

But after a year of no luck finding anything half hospitable, we decided maybe
we should extend our search. To Victoria. It made a lot of sense---Erin had lots
of career opportunities there, and we had amalgamated lots of family on both
sides to the island over the last few years. If we were going to have a child,
having family around would be quite a boon.

So we decided to find a realtor in Victoria. We interviewed a few people, and
decided to go with one. It wasn't the hardest choice in the world; we just
*didn't* pick the one who kept sending me realtor memes at 2am.

The realtor picked us up at the ferry and showed us five or six places. All of
them were terrible, but they were all an order of magnitude better than anything
we'd seen in Vancouver. We weren't ready to buy anything, but felt, for the
first time, *inspired.* We were always curious why realtors scheduled an hour to
see a place, when it took us 5 minutes to know that we didn't want anything to
do with it. But then she took us to one, and we somehow spent the WHOLE HOUR
discussing if and how we could make it work.

We put in an offer on some other place. It was nice, and in a great
neighborhood, but the floors drooped and the basement ceiling was high enough to
stand in---barely! I could stand at full height, but I could feel the ceiling on
my hair. We asked the realtor how much we should offer. She said "however much
you'd like." NOT VERY HELPFUL. We put in an offer. It didn't get accepted; the
other party offered $5,000 more. We were *not pleased* about the situation. It
wasn't the first time we'd felt like our realtor was useless and just in it for
a paycheck.

So we fired her ass.

It was very satisfying.

I'd never really *fired* anyone before. I'd stopped taking lessons, and switched
banks, and that sort of thing. But never fired. It felt kinda good! Something
about taking agency and removing obstacles that weren't moving towards the goal.

Work was going smoothly. In late late December, I had had a Eureka! moment and
realized the solution to all of our problems. So I had been busy implementing
that, and for the first time in the two years I'd been working there, my team
was No Longer in the Hot Seat. What a great feeling! The hard, intellectual work
was done, and I got to spend the rest of my time on fun, interesting
problems---exploring the new terrain, as it were, rather than bushwacking while
being eaten alive by conceptual mosquitoes.

In February we went to see [The
Brutalist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Brutalist) which was a great movie
and probably the only film I watched in 2024. Strongly recommended; I'd go as
far as to say the first half was perfect. At intermission (yes, there is an
intermission), Erin and I left the theatre, bought bubble teas, and snuck them
back in. Turns out there IS a reason that the put the protective melted lid
thing on bubble tea!

Erin and I alternate about who's doing a Valentine's Day date for whom (c.f. an
upcoming one-day blog post about *Relationship Technology*). 2025 was my year.
I organized a day of trail riding on some horses! But the 14th came, and brought
with it an uncharacteristic cold snap that plunged Vancouver into the antarctic.
IT WAS SO COLD THAT THE HORSES WENT ON *STRIKE*. How is this possible? I don't
know, but our plans were cancelled at the last minute. Maybe it's the work of
that guy who was running for MP on a platform of "let's give dogs the vote."
Unions for horses too I guess.

My cousin Amara and her lovely husband Tyler were in town in March, for some
wedding that I wasn't invited to (not that I expected to be.) After a great deal
of back-and-forth about where exactly we ought to go for dinner---a true Maguire
Operation---we settled on The Keg. Not really. It was some sort of sushi place.
Amara and Tyler are excellent humans and we had the most delightful evening with
them. Amara was [38+2 weeks
pregananant](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NDvaRF4HQHQ), so she didn't join in
on the boozy Mudslides.

Erin was going through some drama at work around this time, and to apologize
they told her to go out for a fancy dinner and to bring me along. I'm not much
of a fancy dinner sort of guy, but I go to these things in solidarity with my
wife, who does like fancy dinners. The only things I remember about the meal was
a horseradish icecream (oddly good---*is spicy milk catching on?*), and a rose
made out of meats and beets. Reindeer, if I recall? But that seems crazy so
probably I don't recall. The most fun part of the evening was that the wait
staff was on point with refilling our glasses of water. Sometimes when I'm bored
I like to make my own fun, so I decided I would just make sure my glass was
empty *every time* they went past. Nobody caught on until refill #18.

Also in March, CPF Luke invited me over for his famous Soup Night. But he was
a damn liar and it turned out to actually be his birthday party! The ultimate
betrayal!!! But it's fine because I did the exact same thing to him the year
previously (albeit with less soup.) I felt extra bad because I had forced CPF
Luke to give me a piano lesson earlier that day, which he had, albeit not with
his full attention. But it was cool to be invited to a secret birthday party by
someone I thought was SO COOL for a whole year beforehand.

Also also in March, Erin and I had still been heading over to Victoria to look
at houses. Equipped with our new realtor Nick, he took us to a place we'd asked
the previous realtor to show us, but who always had some excuse why she
couldn't. Turned out we LOVED the place, even despite the vampire people living
inside, even despite the Giant Little Mermaid Decals and
Garfield-the-cat-as-a-butch-lesbian-who-smokes-blunts posters, even despite the
bongs being hit *while we were touring the place.*

It was what you might call "a bit of a fixer-upper." Over a hundred years old,
with lots of original knob-and-tube wiring. "Signs of rodent activity." Rot in
the walls. Vampire testimonies about the basement flooding when it rained a lot
outside. That sort of thing. And yet, we walked away thinking it was the house
for us. And then Erin found a four-leaf-clover just outside. Which is not at all
rare for her, but we decided to take it as an omen. Nick the realtor was MUCH
more helpful on the negotiation side of things. One heartfelt letter and a LOT
of paperwork and money later, we owned a house! We'd get possession May 7th!

That was a long six weeks to wait. Finally the day came. Erin and I each took
a week off of work to go do House Stuff. We had a mattress ordered to our
doorstep, I secretly packed up the celebratory tequila, and met Erin after work
to go catch a ferry to our new home. We were cutting it pretty close to the 15
minute cut-off for the ferry, so I hopped out of the cab and ran to buy tickets.
The DIY machine wouldn't accept my payment, but the man at the counter would! He
beckoned me over. I said "two tickets please' and he frowned. "Where is the
other person?" "She's just outside." "Sorry, I can't sell these to you unless
she is physically in the room. And there are only 30 seconds left."

Long rare-inducing story short, we missed the sailing. "There's nothing I can
do" he lied RIGHT TO MY FACE. So we had to wait around for two hours in the
middle-of-fucking-nowhere Tsawwassen to go be in our first home, because some
asshole wouldn't sell us some tickets because we were 15 seconds too late.

It was... challenging.

We spent the evening unpacking our mattress, drinking the celebratory tequila,
and swing dancing around the house. I'd even thought to bring curtains! The
previous owner left a beautiful letter to us, and a painting of our new house
that he'd had commissioned. What a guy!

Erin's mom came down to help us paint. The house we'd bought came in beautiful
nicotine-yellow, and the vampire people hadn't done much in the way of cleaning.
So I learned what trisodium phosphate is, and we got COOKING on those walls. 14
hour days, listening to the Dixie Chicks, going up and down a damn ladder. But
Erin's mom is a true champ, and despite being in her sixties, she was tireless
and went way harder than either of us did. And we went really hard. We kept
trying to order Subway, because we had some coupons, but all week they had
a sign on the door saying "NO INTERNET AND NO COUPONS."

Despite owning a house, we weren't actually living there yet. We still had our
tiny 400sqft apartment in Vancouver to deal with. We had a month of crossover
with the two places just to get our ducks in a row. It was a hard month. I was
still working remotely. And apparently Erin and I were the only ones. The
internet company somehow managed to screw up the dates and transfered our
service a month in advance. Which meant that our apartment, like Subway, no
longer had internet or accepted coupons.

We had reserved a nice 11ft U-haul van to move our stuff. And we had made
a ferry reservation for said U-haul. The day before our expected move, I got
a call from U-haul confirming our reservation. "So, uhh, we don't have a van for
you. But we have a 26ft truck with airbrakes. Also it's not where you wanted to
pick it up. Now you have to pick it up in a different city." But I *didnt want*
to drive a 26ft truck with airbrakes. I don't know how to drive a 26ft truck
with airbrakes. I already hate driving. Driving a 26ft truck with airbrakes
doesn't seem like my idea of a good time.

Turns out U-haul's reservation system is more of a "reservation" "system." The
*system* is that it always says "yes, that's doable." And then the day of, some
poor sap has to sort out something that is kinda almost what you wanted. But
there is no planning. There is no customer satisfaction. There is only getting
shafted.

I called U-haul back and told them to pound eggs. But we had places to be, and
no means of getting there. So in a tizzy, I started calling professional movers.
Thankfully I came across Vic, who got us all sorted *on very short notice.* It
meant Erin and I had to stay up until 3am packing because we had 24h less time
than we were expecting. Despite our frayed nerves and lack of sleep, hitting the
sack at 3am with our job well done was its own satisfaction.

Vic's crew arrived bright and early the next day. Three big burly men, who Had
A System. They had lingo for all of their moving moves. They were a well-oiled
machine, and I was extremely impressed. Of particular note was that they managed
to get our wedding arch off our balcony and into their truck---which isn't very
impressive until you realize the arch doesn't come apart and it doesn't fit in
any dimension through any of the doorways that it needed to. So instead the guys
somehow pivoted it over and off the balcony. Very impressed. If you need some
good moving guys, hit up [Vic](https://www.island-movers.ca/).

We packed up the cat and moved her separately. She didn't like the trip. She
made a face we'd never seen before. It was a look that I can best describe as
"losing all of your sanity due to having seen an eldrich horror." But she took
the ferry like a champ, and spend the next week being afraid of the ceiling fan
and hiding in our little gremlin room.

There was a lot to do at the new house! We got the locks re-keyed, and I made
friends with the locksmith due to having gone to spy school. We needed the
emergency shutoff on our plumbing to in fact shut off the water in case of an
emergency. Erin is tangentially related to a plumber, whom we hired. He did
great work, but we'd heard he is not very good at billing. It's been 9 months
now, and we still haven't seen the bill. But every time I run into this guy at
a family function, he says "don't worry, I'll send it over sometime." So it
doesn't seem like it's going to come out in the wash. I'll report back in my
2026 retrospective whether it's arrived by then.

Despite living in Victoria, Erin still had a job in Vancouver. So she'd fly over
Monday morning, stay on her dad's couch for two nights, and then take the ferry
back Wednesday evening. I'd pick her up from the ferry and we'd bask in one
another's presence. The reunion was always great, but I'm not sure it was worth
the being apart. Once I somehow got the time wrong, and showed up to the
ferry two hours ahead of schedule. Oopsies! So I went geocaching in Sidney, to
not much avail. But if you're ever in need of killing some time, might
I strongly recommend getting into geocaching.

All of this brings us to June. Erin woke me up on father's day with a cup of
coffee. In a new coffee mug! It said "World's #1 Dad." "Erin," I said, "I'm not
a dad." She gave me a look, and probably started counting inside her head.
"...OH!!!" Turns out she was pregnant! She'd known for about a week, but
couldn't resist pulling this prank on me, with father's day being so near. This
was very exciting news---we'd been trying for a few months, so it was very
welcome indeed.

Of course it was too soon to tell anyone. But my parents came to visit for TWO
WEEKS immediately after. And it was so great to have them around---they really
helped around the house. Two notable things they did were to glue the wall to
itself, and to jack up our balcony with a carjack. But I digress. Erin was
having a hard time in her first trimester, and having ones inlaws around is
never easy. Since we felt it was too soon to tell them, we had to come up with
a LOT of fancy footwork in the argument department for why Erin was spending so
much time in bed. Thankfully she was a corporate lawyer at the time, so being
exhausted by work was a pretty easy go-to.


- Jul
  - ultrasound yay
  - book of mormon yeesh
- Aug
  - sooke day! saw whales
  - got a midwife
  - DAD IS BACK 4 days
  - andrew koto wedding
  - erin quits her job
  - sandy starts interviewing
  - squamish
  - chester & kiana
  - alan & pam
  - olly & claire
- Sep
  - job ended
  - jlo
  - BUNCH OF FURNITURE
  - door guy doesnt come
  - rory & naomii 4 days
  - i joined an awful choir
  - swing dancing!
  - erin spent the month traveling
- Oct
  - start new job
  - qualicum
  - alison comes to visit 4 days
    - its thanksgiving! ian doesnt come
  - darby's last trivia
    - we won!!
  - ONE MILLION POUNDS OF RICE
  - flooring guy
  - halloween with the italians
  - halloween with the kids
- Nov
  - FLOODING
  - made mugs with erin
  - emily in town for a week
    - The Door Guy Fiasco
    - renate comes to visit
  - flooring begins
    - need to move everything into the basement
    - pick up the boys
    - forget the legs
  - off to ingrids
  - off to penticton
  - pick up the cat
  - OH NO CAR TROUBLES
  - see darrin
  - OH NO CAR TROUBLES
  - call matthew on his million rice
  - surprise erin birthday
    - raptors!
  - michael arrives
  - truck parade
- Dec
  - vaccine troubles
  - hosting christmas
