---
layout: post
title: adventure
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
---

I found myself naked, wearing nothing but a silly hat. I was yelling at the top
of my lungs at nothing in particular, atop a rock in the middle of the Baltic
Sea. It was the most alive I'd felt in a very, very long time. And if you'd
asked me six months earlier if I could imagine myself ever in this situation,
I'd have laughed at your ridiculous question. So how did I get here?

My first "adult" fear, which is to say, one not of vampires or the dark, was of
an even more duplicitous boogeyman. It was the fear of complacency; of waking up
in your middle age and wondering where your life had gone; of lying on your
deathbed with dreams and potential left unfulfilled, or worse, never attempted.

After having spent some 24 years of my life following the safe path dictated in
front of me by Western society, I realized that my worst fear had snuck up on me
without my having noticed it. The timing was fortuitous; I had four months off
of university in which I was expected to find and work a professional
internship. I didn't need the money, the prestige or the credits, so I decided
to take the semester off. I wanted to travel. The conventional advice is that if
you don't travel before starting a job after university, you'll never actually
get around to it.

I'd met a brilliant, beautiful, flirtatious woman one year prior, and we'd
stayed in touch. She invited me to come visit her in Estonia -- a country I'd
never heard of, and couldn't find on a map if my life depended on it -- and I
decided that Estonia was as good a place as any to begin my travels.

A few months later, I disembarked the plane after having been in the air for the
better part of sixteen hours. Tallinn, Estonia. I set out, armed only with a
school backpack and my handwritten directions to get from the airport to my
hostel. There was a healthy mix of petrifying fear and an unbounded excitement
for what was to come next. This was my life now, and there was no going back. I
was somebody new. I was anybody I wanted to be.

