---
layout: post
title: engineering-ideas
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
confidence: 4
---

I'm an engineer. My only employable skill is *deeply understanding problems* and
then solving them. Although I am not currently working, my historical market
rate is a good indication that I am rather good at understanding and
subsequently solving problems.

By and large, society trusts engineering. We don't think too much about it, but
we expect the vast majority of things our everyday life to *just work.*
Implicitly, this is the trust that the engineers have done their job well; that
they've built things that are going to work through to their warranty, and
aren't going to explode, and that we can assume things will work tomorrow like
they do today.

Unfortunately, this public trust doesn't extend to domestic or social problems.
This, I think, is a symptom of two underlying causes. The first is that STEM
types are not widely considered to be very good socially. It's awkward to hang
out with a STEM person, therefore they must not understand people, therefore why
should we trust them with our people problems?

The second cause is that Western humans don't like to think of themselves as
machines. We like to think of ourselves as special, individual, blessed with a
(not necessarily religious) soul, which makes us different from all the other
humans out there. Maybe some of this is true, but humans, on average, are pretty
dang similar. We all get cranky when we're hungry, or tired, or feeling
under-appreciated. We're inclined to trust members of our in-group, and distrust
members of the out-group. We imagine that attractive people are smarter than
their uglier counterparts.

In fact, there are at least three entire field dedicated to manipulating humans
through relatively well-understood levers that work pretty often statistically
--- advertising, psychology, and scamming. We like to think we're special, that
statistics don't apply to us. We like to feel that way, but it's not true. While
these people can't fine-tune our behavior as well as a mechanic can tweak a car,
the social engineers sure make a lot of money doing it.

Engineers are defined by their tinkering, by their unyielding attempts to
understand the underlying dynamics of something. It's this sense of wonder, and
the confidence that everything will make sense in time, that is common between
engineers. Engineers are differentiated inside the profession by the substrate
of what they work on, but a mechanical engineer is going to be much more similar
to a chemical engineer than to a lawyer.

My point? The engineering mindset is good at solving problems, regardless of
their substrate. And we have no reason a priori to expect that domestic or social
problems are *so fundamentally different* that throwing some engineering mindset
at them won't improve things.

I can't count the number of times people have explicitly asked me for advice
regarding a problem of theirs, and then responded with "that's such an
*engineering solution.*" Oh, you mean, you didn't want a logical,
well-thought-out answer that would actually solve the problem you brought
forward? *I'm sorry!* I *didn't mean* to take your complaint seriously and give
you my professional skills pro bono to *actually try to help!*

This sort of thing drives me bonkers.

Yes, I understand that lots of times people *don't actually want a solution.* I
understand that maybe they just want to complain, or to be listened to, or
simply to feel like you care. But on the other hand, sometimes people genuinely
*do* want good advice. What am I, a damn mind reader? If you don't want a
solution, don't ask for one! Neither I nor anyone else is a mind reader, and we
can't divine what you want without *some* sort of clue.

This clue need not be vocal, but it does need to be clearly understood by
everyone. But words are a great tool that humanity invented for a reason, and so
let's try our best to use them whenever we actually want understanding!

What I've come to realize is that "engineering solutions" are solutions to the
wrong problem. If an idea is dismissed as being an engineering solution, it
means that the problem we're talking about isn't the problem we're *talking*
about.

