---
layout: post
title: Beware Hunting Nazis
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
confidence: 3
---

Isn't it weird how any behavior can be justified if the people involved are
Nazis? Remember when we were all [up in arms to to punch
Nazis?](https://theestablishment.co/why-punching-nazis-is-not-only-ethical-but-imperative-db47a167c2fb/index.html)
Or how about when we rejoiced about suspending the rights (and bank accounts) of
Canadian trucker protesters [because they were
Nazis?](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/08/canada-ottawa-trucker-protest-extremist-qanon-neo-nazi)
Seems pretty cut and dry, until you realize [the guy who froze the Nazi's bank
accounts was
Hitler](https://www.reuters.com/world/elon-musk-tweets-then-deletes-meme-comparing-trudeau-hitler-2022-02-17/)
On the other side of the fence, it turns out that vaccine mandates are
[equivalent to Nazi
experiments.](https://www.theguardian.com/media/2022/jan/22/tucker-carlson-compares-us-vaccine-mandates-nazi-medical-experiments)
Or how about how Putin using [Nazis in Ukraine as his casus
belli?](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/05/09/russia-victory-day-putin-speech-ukraine/)
You probably know that [Trump is
Hitler](https://www.salon.com/2019/06/29/this-is-the-week-it-became-accurate-to-compare-trump-to-hitler/),
but did know that [AOC is also
Hitler?](https://www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2019/01/23/ben-stein-compares-alexandria-ocasio-cortez-dictators-such-hitler-stalin/)

Maybe I'm just a skeptic, but it seems unlikely that *all* these people are
Nazis. Or, maybe they're all *sorta* Nazis, but in different ways, and probably
none of them self-identify as such. But if you ask me, if all of these people,
on *both sides* of issues are Nazis, well, then, maybe the word "Nazi" *really*
just means
"[outgroup](https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/09/30/i-can-tolerate-anything-except-the-outgroup/)."

We're all keen to jump on the "punch Nazis" train, but there don't really seem
to be many Nazis around. The SPLC puts the number of "active hate groups" in
America at 773. My programming groups are never bigger than 30 people, and I
suspect "active hate" is less popular than programming. Assuming that's true,
there is effectively a cap on active haters at around 25,000 --- the vast
majority of whom are likely not *actively* perpetrating genocide. Per capita,
this is 0.00015% of people are active haters. What do you think the readership
of The Washington Post, The Guardian, and Salon is? Probably more than 25,000 is
my guess --- which is strongly suggestive that the [*demand for Nazis is greater
than the
supply.*](https://twitter.com/edlatimore/status/1098960480159391744?lang=en)

When someone gets called a Nazi, very rarely does the accuser mean "this person
wants to rule Europe are purify bloodlines via holocaust." They mean, "I don't
like this person" and maybe "this person overstepped." But those are both
flaccid arguments, and unlikely to convince a third party, and the accuser knows
it. So instead, it gets upgraded to the worst possible sort of person: the
Western archetype of hate-worthiness.

You can see how effective this is. "I don't like this person" sounds lame. But
"I don't like this person *because he's a Nazi*," well, now, there's no
recourse. Nazis are so vilified that, upon hearing someone is a Nazi, it becomes
not only your moral imperative to hate them, but to punch them too!

And how can you possibly respond to "you're a Nazi"? Perhaps the old schoolyard
retort "No I'm not, you are"? Calling someone a Nazi is the nuclear option.
There's no coming back; only mitigation.

As such, your spidey-sense should be way past "tingling" --- all the way to
"flesh melting off" --- when you hear heinous action being justified by
countering Nazism. Not only is the likelihood low of this person being a Nazi,
but it's an extremely convenient tactic for aligning you against someone. And
worse, it's a narrative that sells directly into your sense of Standing Up For
What's Right. It's an honorable trait, certainly, but exploitable.

