---
layout: post
title: pai
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
---

## I

If you're not the poetic type, you might describe the road to Pai as "winding."
However, those of us who delight in the taste and the sound of words would more
readily describe the road to Pai as "winding *as fuck*."

The trip began, as so many do, with yours truly having absolutely no plan
whatsoever. My traveling modus operandi seems to be "don't have an idea of
what's going on, and wing it when you get there". Or to be more pithy: yolo. The
general strategy is to ask cool people where I should go next, and then follow
their advice. It usually works out.

Well, it used to usually work out. I didn't realize that Thailand is not only
the land of smiles, but also of babby's first backpacking adventure. The
overwhelming majority of people I've met on this trip have been aged 18-22,
(wisely) taking a gap year between whatever bullshit societal expectations have
been thrust upon them. This is an age that I refer to (in private) as
"pre-pubescent". What I mean by that is that your brain is most-of-the-way
there, but you're lacking the experience to really do anything with it. In the
same way you can tell if someone is going through puberty, you can tell if
someone is going through this sort of mental-puberty too.

The point I'm laboriously trying to get to is that as much as I like early
twenty-somethings, the places they recommend I be are generally not the places I
end up liking.

More and more frequently I find myself idly wondering if I've secretly become an
old man without realizing it.

So anyway, the road to Pai is winding as fuck. I find myself in a small minivan
with twelve other souls as our chartered driver works those pedals as though
he's playing a particularly difficult harmonium piece on a head full of
methamphetamine. We are all *literally* holding on for dear life, out of some
reptilian instinct that the coat hanger on the back of the seat in front of us
will somehow protect us in the seemingly-likely event of an accident.

Probably as much as a defense mechanism as by being a gigantic nerd, I find
myself thinking about acceleration -- proving theorems about it in my head. That
leads to graphing this winding-as-fuck road in my brain, and attempting to
determine the length of it, which of course requires deriving some sort of
continuous integral of Pythagorean triangles over the curve. I'll spare you the
rest, but apparently this is the kind of shit that flashes through my head
during a near-death experience.

Who am I kidding? It's the kind of stuff I'm always thinking about.

Thankfully we make it to Pai in one piece. There would have been much rejoicing
if we weren't so hopped up on adrenaline that we could do anything more
complicated than navigate the endless luggage in the van's corridors.


## II

The mind has a remarkable aptitude for narratives. Everywhere we look we find
ourselves *looking for meaning*, and more often than not, that meaning seems to
come in the form of stories.

A friend I met a few weeks back told me her life philosophy over strong Long
Island ice teas. I doubt that I'll ever forget it:

> Do the thing you're supposed to do in the place you're supposed to do it.

This has really resonated with me. Most people I tell it to say "oh, you mean
like, 'when in Rome'?" Which I suppose is one interpretation of it, but, that's
not the takeaway that I feel here.

Do the thing you're supposed to do in the place you're supposed to do it. You
can look at this as "you should go to tourist attractions", but you can also
interpret it as "figure out what it is you're supposed to do next in your life,
and then go do that thing." Go to the place you need to be, and then do the
thing you need to do.

My literal, science brain is shouting at me that this is all fatalist bullshit,
but I think it makes sense in retrospect, through the lens of storytelling.
There isn't really any sort of fate-driven fundamental physical force drawing me
towards places and people, but fate is a perfectly fine narrative device for
when I look back and try to figure out what this life means to me.

I think you know what I mean. These are the experiences you look back on years
later, and can point to as a deciding moment in your life. Things would have
gone rather differently had you not been there and done that.


## III

The reason I bring this up is that in retrospect, I went to Pai for a reason. I
went to Pai because it was where I was supposed to be in order to do the thing I
was supposed to do.


