---
layout: post
title: tax-horror
date: TO_BE_DETERMINED
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
confidence: 4
---

It began, as many things do, with a phone call. On some day in early January, I
got a call from a man with a very thick African-sounding accent, asking whether
I was "Alexander Magooer."

Close enough, I thought. "Sure, what's up?"

"Hello, my name is Asazabad Mafusasteb. I am from the Canada Revenue Agency. Can
you confirm your identity by giving me your birthday and social insurance
number, please?"

The oldest phishing scam in the book. I hung up on him. Not today, buster. You
have to get up *pretty* early to pull one over on ol' Alexander Magooer.

But our man Asazabad called back a few days later, asking for the same
information. More politely than last time, I told him that I don't divulge
personal information to strangers over the phone. Thank you, and have a good
day.

Asazabad called back several times over the next few days. "Listen, Alexander, I
am from the CRA. My Please confirm your identity by giving me your birthday and
social insurance number." I continued to be obstinate. "If you really are from
the CRA, please give me your extension number, and I'll call you right back, and
then we can chat."

"Because of the pandemic, I am working from home. I do not have an extension."

Sure thing, Asazabad. I told him I'd be happy to confirm my identity with him as
soon as he could confirm his to me. He gave me his "agent ID" for the CRA,
claiming it was sufficient. I told him that even if this was a real ID number,
nothing about quoting it to me meant that it was *his* ID number.

I did a quick Google search for his phone number. It came up as a known scam
caller. I hung up again.

Asazabad continued to call me every few days. Over time, he grew more desperate.
"I am from collections. You owe us a lot of money. You can log into your CRA
account and see."

As it happens, I *couldn't* log in to my CRA account. As far as I knew, I didn't
have a CRA account. Although occasionally I received emails telling me I had a
new message in my CRA account. Those emails frustratingly never included the
text of the new messages. I'd tried half-heartedly a few times over the last few
years to log in and check out these mysterious messages, but it's not something
they make easy.

In order to log in to your CRA account, you need to provide your social
insurance number, your mailing address, and some random-each-time number from
some random-each-time year that you filed taxes. Sometimes I had the documents
they asked for, often I did not. Regardless of that, it never let me into the
system.

But that was OK, because as far as I looked at it, if the CRA really needed to
get in touch with me, they'd find a way to do it. It's not my responsibility to
figure out what's wrong with their stupid website.

Asazabad continued calling, and we kept coming to the same impasse. He couldn't
identify himself to me, and I wouldn't identify myself to him until he did.
Classic Mexican standoff. He kept insisting that I could just log into my CRA
account and see that collections did indeed want to speak with me.

In a moment of weakness, I momentarily considered the idea that Asazabad really
might be from the CRA. And, if that was the case, maybe he'd be incentivized to
help me log into my account. So I unwisely gave him my mailing address, thinking
that maybe the issue was that the CRA had the wrong address on file, and that
was why I could never log in. Big mistake.

On February 7th, I call the CRA for an unrelated reason (trying to pay taxes)
and spend 41 minutes on hold. Since I'm talking with them anyway, I ask about
getting into my online account. That's a different department, and they put me
on hold for another half hour before I get through to Tommy. Turns out they do
have the wrong address on file; they've got some address that I haven't lived at
since 2010; despite having filed taxes with correct addresses every year. They
manage to get my address updated, but tell me they have been mailing letters to
me at that address for a long time.

I ask Tommy if he can confirm whether Asazabad is a real agent of the CRA. He
transfers me. It takes another twenty minutes. Jimmy tells me he can't find any
record of Asazabad being a real agent, but, and I quote "that doesn't mean he
isn't." What the hell.

Even though my mailing address has been updated, I still can't log into the damn
website. It seems I've locked myself out of the account by failing to log in too
many times. You would think they wouldn't make it so hard to pay them taxes.

Asazabad thankfully has given up calling me. But on February 14th---Valentines
Day---I receive a letter in the mail alleging to be from the CRA. "You owe us
$20,000. Please pay us within 10 days, or we will begin seizing your assets."
The letter is dated February 5th. Uh oh. I'm pretty certain I don't owe them
anything. I'm an honest person who begrudgingly pays his taxes every year. I
haven't hidden any income or property or anything, and I've never done even a
little bit of fraud.

Rather than focusing on romantic things with my fiancee, I spend most of
Valentines day on hold with the CRA, trying to confirm whether or not any of
this is real, and whether or not my assets are about to be seized on the morrow.
Because I'm missing some returns that they want, I'm unable to adequately verify
myself to any agents, and so they bounce me around for a few hours. All I really
want to know is whether Asazabad is a scam artist or not, and nobody will give
me that information until I've given them the right numbers from the right tax
returns.

What the hell is this bureaucracy?[ Has the planet gone mad?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IR7a8rPlAao)

Eventually I manage to get through to an actual person who seems to care. Edward
tells me that the CRA has been hiring aggressively as of late, and so most
people I talk to are completely green, know nothing, and play it entirely by the
book, refusing to see the humanity in anyone they speak to. His words vindicate
my experience.

Edward pulls up my file, and although he can't give me any information about it,
he does confirm that Asazabad is a real agent and is in fact trying to contact
me.

Oh.

Oh no.

Oh shit.

Maybe that $20,000 bill thing is real.

So I call Asazabad back, and say I'm ready to talk. I confirm my identity, and
he says "you owe us $20,000. Please pay us. You can pay us through your online
account." I would say that the joke was on him, and that I still can't log into
my online account, but the joke it seems, is on me.

Of course, Asazabad can't tell me *why exactly* I owe the CRA $20,000. He
handwaves something about over-contributions to my Tax-Free Savings Account
(TFSA), but he doesn't know anything more than that. That information hasn't
been provided to him. He's just the collections guy, and he wants his money.

The TFSA thing seems suspicious. I had a TFSA briefly from 2009 to 2014, but
it was completely by the book, and I'd closed the account before I left Canada
in 2015. So what the hell was going on?

I called the bank branch in my small hometown where I had my TFSA. They were
sympathetic, and I asked them to pull up any records they might have on it. They
didn't have any. Turns out by law they're only allowed to keep those records for
7 years, which meant they had destroyed any relevant evidence that might be
helpful for me to sort this obvious mistake out.

The CRA, it seems, is not beholden to this law restricting their records of my
TFSA. Cool.

After a few more hours on hold, Edward manages to get me logged into my online
account. Or so he says. Foolishly, I hang up. It doesn't work. I call back. I
spend another hour on hold before Mandeep *actually* gets me into my online
account.

Sure enough, in my account there is a backlog of eight years worth of unread
messages. The interesting stuff happens in 2020, when my TFSA from a decade
earlier was reassessed, and determined to be illegally held. Therefore, any
money I had in that account accrued penalties for every month it was there. Add
that all up, round to the nearest ten thousand for interest penalties for the
three years they were unable to contact me because they were sending mail to my
childhood home, and you've got yourself one hell of an expensive bill.

The question of course is why did the CRA determine my TFSA to be held
illegally? Having spent the entirety of that penalty period dating a lawyer,
I've learned that the best case of action in cases like these is to go read the
law. And sure enough, I'm in the right. All Canadians who live in Canada are
eligible for a TFSA, with a total cap that increases every year you have it
open. I am in fact a Canadian, who was living in Canada, and I was well below
the cap. Therefore, my TFSA was not illegal, and the CRA is in the wrong.

But unfortunately the onus is on me to show that.

The notices of reassessment state that I have 90 days during which I can file a
dispute. A salient question is "90 days from *when?*" From when they issued the
document and sent it somewhere I haven't lived for over a decade? Or from when I
receive the notice? Knowing the government, it's probably the former.

On February 15th I call the CRA again, and after the usual hour-long wait, I
speak with Tammy. I explain the situation. She tells me that I never informed
the CRA that I left Canada in 2015. Then, when I came back to Canada from
Thailand in 2020 and filed my taxes, I said "yes" when asked if I had "moved to
Canada." Which was true; I was not living in Canada earlier that year, and was
when I filed my taxes. The idiot CRA however interprets this as asking "did you
immigrate to Canada?"

Even though I was born in Canada and had well-established financial ties in the
country for nearly 25 years that the CRA all knew about, it automatically
assumed my "immigration" to Canada meant that I was not a citizen, and
therefore, retroactively, that my old TFSA was illegal.

Tammy advised me to write a letter and send it by post to the "special tax
services unit" in the middle of nowhere Canada. I rattled off such a letter,
explaining the mistake, and swallowed my pride to grovel for forgiveness,
even though I didn't feel to be in the wrong. But pride is cheap when you've got
$20,000 on the line. I paid the exorbitant $60 fee to have my letter delivered
by courier to the specialty tax services unit, and figured that would be the end
of it.

That was not, in fact, the end of it.

I called Asazabad back, explaining the situation to him. He listened quietly and
then said "you owe us $20,000. Please pay through the online portal." Thinking
maybe that he'd had a brain aneurysm, I explained it all to him again. "That may
be," he said, "but I do not know whether your dispute will be successful, and in
the meantime, you owe us a lot of money." Asazabad patiently explained to me, as
if I were a child, that the best course of action would be for me to pay the CRA
$20,000. And if my dispute were successful, they would pay it back to me.

I'm sure the CRA is good for it, but $20,000 is a big chunk of change, and being
in the middle of the bureaucracy, it seems unlikely that I'd see that money
again any time soon. I told Asazabad I'd get back to him.

So I went back to the statute, which says that all taxpayers have a right to not
pay anything while their case is in dispute, except in cases of "jeopardy." I
called Asazabad back, stating I wouldn't be paying the money, and cited the
relevant paragraph to him. If the powers that be considered my account to be in
jeopardy, I told him to give me that in writing, and wouldn't consider the
matter further until then.

A week later, Asazabad calls me back, stating my cited clause doesn't apply,
because my dispute window closed way back in 2020. And so he wants his money.
But since I've been so cooperative, he's willing to cut me a deal. We can work
together to make a year-long repayment plan in monthly installments. I forget
about my resolve to not talk to him any further unless I get jeopardy in
writing. We make a payment plan.

I call the CRA to confirm that they received my letter. They did; and say it
will take 90 days to get everything resolved.

When the day to pay Asazabad part of the penalty comes, I instead pay my taxes.
It all goes to the same account, and if push comes to shove, I plan to make an
argument that part of that money is for taxes, and part of it is repayment on
the TFSA charges. My ruse works, because Asazabad doesn't call back.

The next month rolls around, with blessedly little contact from the CRA. I'd
like to keep it that way, and since I paid my taxes in full, I can't play the
same trick again this time. Instead, I actually send real money as part of the
payment plan. Asazabad thankfully continues to not be in touch.



